e Project Gutenberg EBook of Anna
Karenina, by Leo Tolstoy
is ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other
parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may
copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
included with this ebook or online at hp://www.gutenberg.org/license. If you
are not located in the United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country
where you are located before using this ebook.
Title: Anna Karenina
Author: Leo Tolstoy
Release Date: July ,  [EBook #]
Reposted: April ,  [corrections, reposted to new folder structure by David
Widger]
Reposted: December ,  [corrections]
Reposted: December ,  [corrections, conversion to HTML]
Reposted: February ,  [conversion to XHTML Strict by David Widger]
Reposted: February ,  [corrections, conversion to RST by Andrew Sly]
Language: English
Character set encoding: UTF-
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNA KARENINA ***

Produced by David Brannan.

Anna Karenina
by Leo Tolstoy

Translated by Constance Garne

PART ONE
Chapter 
Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.
Everything was in confusion in the Oblonskys’ house. e wife had discovered that the husband was carrying on an intrigue with a French girl, who
had been a governess in their family, and she had announced to her husband that
she could not go on living in the same house with him. is position of aﬀairs
had now lasted three days, and not only the husband and wife themselves, but all
the members of their family and household, were painfully conscious of it. Every
person in the house felt that there was no sense in their living together, and that
the stray people brought together by chance in any inn had more in common with
one another than they, the members of the family and household of the Oblonskys. e wife did not leave her own room, the husband had not been at home
for three days. e children ran wild all over the house; the English governess
quarreled with the housekeeper, and wrote to a friend asking her to look out for a
new situation for her; the man-cook had walked oﬀ the day before just at dinner
time; the kitchen-maid, and the coachman had given warning.
ree days aer the quarrel, Prince Stepan Arkadyevitch Oblonsky—Stiva,
as he was called in the fashionable world—woke up at his usual hour, that is, at
eight o’clock in the morning, not in his wife’s bedroom, but on the leather-covered

iii
sofa in his study. He turned over his stout, well-cared-for person on the springy
sofa, as though he would sink into a long sleep again; he vigorously embraced the
pillow on the other side and buried his face in it; but all at once he jumped up, sat
up on the sofa, and opened his eyes.
"Yes, yes, how was it now?" he thought, going over his dream. "Now, how
was it? To be sure! Alabin was giving a dinner at Darmstadt; no, not Darmstadt,
but something American. Yes, but then, Darmstadt was in America. Yes, Alabin
was giving a dinner on glass tables, and the tables sang, Il mio tesoro—not Il mio
tesoro though, but something beer, and there were some sort of lile decanters
on the table, and they were women, too," he remembered.
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes twinkled gaily, and he pondered with a smile.
"Yes, it was nice, very nice. ere was a great deal more that was delightful, only
there’s no puing it into words, or even expressing it in one’s thoughts awake."
And noticing a gleam of light peeping in beside one of the serge curtains, he
cheerfully dropped his feet over the edge of the sofa, and felt about with them
for his slippers, a present on his last birthday, worked for him by his wife on
gold-colored morocco. And, as he had done every day for the last nine years, he
stretched out his hand, without geing up, towards the place where his dressinggown always hung in his bedroom. And thereupon he suddenly remembered
that he was not sleeping in his wife’s room, but in his study, and why: the smile
vanished from his face, he knied his brows.
"Ah, ah, ah! Oo!…" he muered, recalling everything that had happened.
And again every detail of his quarrel with his wife was present to his imagination,
all the hopelessness of his position, and worst of all, his own fault.
"Yes, she won’t forgive me, and she can’t forgive me. And the most awful
thing about it is that it’s all my fault—all my fault, though I’m not to blame. at’s
the point of the whole situation," he reﬂected. "Oh, oh, oh!" he kept repeating
in despair, as he remembered the acutely painful sensations caused him by this
quarrel.
Most unpleasant of all was the ﬁrst minute when, on coming, happy and
good-humored, from the theater, with a huge pear in his hand for his wife, he
had not found his wife in the drawing-room, to his surprise had not found her in
the study either, and saw her at last in her bedroom with the unlucky leer that
revealed everything in her hand.
She, his Dolly, forever fussing and worrying over household details, and
limited in her ideas, as he considered, was siing perfectly still with the leer in
her hand, looking at him with an expression of horror, despair, and indignation.
"What’s this? this?" she asked, pointing to the leer.
And at this recollection, Stepan Arkadyevitch, as is so oen the case, was
not so much annoyed at the fact itself as at the way in which he had met his wife’s

iv
words.
ere happened to him at that instant what does happen to people when
they are unexpectedly caught in something very disgraceful. He did not succeed
in adapting his face to the position in which he was placed towards his wife by the
discovery of his fault. Instead of being hurt, denying, defending himself, begging
forgiveness, instead of remaining indiﬀerent even—anything would have been
beer than what he did do—his face uerly involuntarily (reﬂex spinal action, reﬂected Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was fond of physiology)—uerly involuntarily
assumed its habitual, good-humored, and therefore idiotic smile.
is idiotic smile he could not forgive himself. Catching sight of that smile,
Dolly shuddered as though at physical pain, broke out with her characteristic heat
into a ﬂood of cruel words, and rushed out of the room. Since then she had refused
to see her husband.
"It’s that idiotic smile that’s to blame for it all," thought Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"But what’s to be done? What’s to be done?" he said to himself in despair,
and found no answer.

Chapter 
Stepan Arkadyevitch was a truthful man in his relations with himself. He was
incapable of deceiving himself and persuading himself that he repented of his
conduct. He could not at this date repent of the fact that he, a handsome, susceptible man of thirty-four, was not in love with his wife, the mother of ﬁve living
and two dead children, and only a year younger than himself. All he repented of
was that he had not succeeded beer in hiding it from his wife. But he felt all
the diﬃculty of his position and was sorry for his wife, his children, and himself.
Possibly he might have managed to conceal his sins beer from his wife if he had
anticipated that the knowledge of them would have had such an eﬀect on her. He
had never clearly thought out the subject, but he had vaguely conceived that his
wife must long ago have suspected him of being unfaithful to her, and shut her
eyes to the fact. He had even supposed that she, a worn-out woman no longer
young or good-looking, and in no way remarkable or interesting, merely a good
mother, ought from a sense of fairness to take an indulgent view. It had turned
out quite the other way.
"Oh, it’s awful! oh dear, oh dear! awful!" Stepan Arkadyevitch kept repeating to himself, and he could think of nothing to be done. "And how well things
were going up till now! how well we got on! She was contented and happy in her
children; I never interfered with her in anything; I let her manage the children

v
and the house just as she liked. It’s true it’s bad her having been a governess in
our house. at’s bad! ere’s something common, vulgar, in ﬂirting with one’s
governess. But what a governess!" (He vividly recalled the roguish black eyes of
Mlle. Roland and her smile.) "But aer all, while she was in the house, I kept myself in hand. And the worst of it all is that she’s already … it seems as if ill-luck
would have it so! Oh, oh! But what, what is to be done?"
ere was no solution, but that universal solution which life gives to all
questions, even the most complex and insoluble. at answer is: one must live
in the needs of the day—that is, forget oneself. To forget himself in sleep was
impossible now, at least till nighime; he could not go back now to the music
sung by the decanter-women; so he must forget himself in the dream of daily life.
"en we shall see," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to himself, and geing up he
put on a gray dressing-gown lined with blue silk, tied the tassels in a knot, and,
drawing a deep breath of air into his broad, bare chest, he walked to the window
with his usual conﬁdent step, turning out his feet that carried his full frame so
easily. He pulled up the blind and rang the bell loudly. It was at once answered by
the appearance of an old friend, his valet, Matvey, carrying his clothes, his boots,
and a telegram. Matvey was followed by the barber with all the necessaries for
shaving.
"Are there any papers from the oﬃce?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, taking
the telegram and seating himself at the looking-glass.
"On the table," replied Matvey, glancing with inquiring sympathy at his master; and, aer a short pause, he added with a sly smile, "ey’ve sent from the
carriage-jobbers."
Stepan Arkadyevitch made no reply, he merely glanced at Matvey in the
looking-glass. In the glance, in which their eyes met in the looking-glass, it was
clear that they understood one another. Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes asked: "Why
do you tell me that? don’t you know?"
Matvey put his hands in his jacket pockets, thrust out one leg, and gazed
silently, good-humoredly, with a faint smile, at his master.
"I told them to come on Sunday, and till then not to trouble you or themselves for nothing," he said. He had obviously prepared the sentence beforehand.
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw Matvey wanted to make a joke and aract aention to himself. Tearing open the telegram, he read it through, guessing at the
words, misspelt as they always are in telegrams, and his face brightened.
"Matvey, my sister Anna Arkadyevna will be here tomorrow," he said, checking for a minute the sleek, plump hand of the barber, cuing a pink path through
his long, curly whiskers.
"ank God!" said Matvey, showing by this response that he, like his master,
realized the signiﬁcance of this arrival—that is, that Anna Arkadyevna, the sister

vi
he was so fond of, might bring about a reconciliation between husband and wife.
"Alone, or with her husband?" inquired Matvey.
Stepan Arkadyevitch could not answer, as the barber was at work on his
upper lip, and he raised one ﬁnger. Matvey nodded at the looking-glass.
"Alone. Is the room to be got ready upstairs?"
"Inform Darya Alexandrovna: where she orders."
"Darya Alexandrovna?" Matvey repeated, as though in doubt.
"Yes, inform her. Here, take the telegram; give it to her, and then do what
she tells you."
"You want to try it on," Matvey understood, but he only said, "Yes sir."
Stepan Arkadyevitch was already washed and combed and ready to be
dressed, when Matvey, stepping deliberately in his creaky boots, came back into
the room with the telegram in his hand. e barber had gone.
"Darya Alexandrovna told me to inform you that she is going away. Let him
do—that is you—do as he likes," he said, laughing only with his eyes, and puing
his hands in his pockets, he watched his master with his head on one side. Stepan
Arkadyevitch was silent a minute. en a good-humored and rather pitiful smile
showed itself on his handsome face.
"Eh, Matvey?" he said, shaking his head.
"It’s all right, sir; she will come round," said Matvey.
"Come round?"
"Yes, sir."
"Do you think so? Who’s there?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, hearing the
rustle of a woman’s dress at the door.
"It’s I," said a ﬁrm, pleasant, woman’s voice, and the stern, pockmarked face
of Matrona Philimonovna, the nurse, was thrust in at the doorway.
"Well, what is it, Matrona?" queried Stepan Arkadyevitch, going up to her
at the door.
Although Stepan Arkadyevitch was completely in the wrong as regards his
wife, and was conscious of this himself, almost every one in the house (even the
nurse, Darya Alexandrovna’s chief ally) was on his side.
"Well, what now?" he asked disconsolately.
"Go to her, sir; own your fault again. Maybe God will aid you. She is suffering so, it’s sad to see her; and besides, everything in the house is topsy-turvy.
You must have pity, sir, on the children. Beg her forgiveness, sir. ere’s no help
for it! One must take the consequences…"
"But she won’t see me."
"You do your part. God is merciful; pray to God, sir, pray to God."
"Come, that’ll do, you can go," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, blushing suddenly.
"Well now, do dress me." He turned to Matvey and threw oﬀ his dressing-gown

vii
decisively.
Matvey was already holding up the shirt like a horse’s collar, and, blowing oﬀ some invisible speck, he slipped it with obvious pleasure over the wellgroomed body of his master.

Chapter 
When he was dressed, Stepan Arkadyevitch sprinkled some scent on himself,
pulled down his shirt-cuﬀs, distributed into his pockets his cigarees, pocketbook,
matches, and watch with its double chain and seals, and shaking out his handkerchief, feeling himself clean, fragrant, healthy, and physically at ease, in spite of
his unhappiness, he walked with a slight swing on each leg into the dining-room,
where coﬀee was already waiting for him, and beside the coﬀee, leers and papers
from the oﬃce.
He read the leers. One was very unpleasant, from a merchant who was
buying a forest on his wife’s property. To sell this forest was absolutely essential;
but at present, until he was reconciled with his wife, the subject could not be
discussed. e most unpleasant thing of all was that his pecuniary interests should
in this way enter into the question of his reconciliation with his wife. And the
idea that he might be led on by his interests, that he might seek a reconciliation
with his wife on account of the sale of the forest—that idea hurt him.
When he had ﬁnished his leers, Stepan Arkadyevitch moved the oﬃcepapers close to him, rapidly looked through two pieces of business, made a few
notes with a big pencil, and pushing away the papers, turned to his coﬀee. As he
sipped his coﬀee, he opened a still damp morning paper, and began reading it.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took in and read a liberal paper, not an extreme one,
but one advocating the views held by the majority. And in spite of the fact that
science, art, and politics had no special interest for him, he ﬁrmly held those views
on all these subjects which were held by the majority and by his paper, and he
only changed them when the majority changed them—or, more strictly speaking,
he did not change them, but they imperceptibly changed of themselves within
him.
Stepan Arkadyevitch had not chosen his political opinions or his views;
these political opinions and views had come to him of themselves, just as he did
not choose the shapes of his hat and coat, but simply took those that were being
worn. And for him, living in a certain society—owing to the need, ordinarily developed at years of discretion, for some degree of mental activity—to have views
was just as indispensable as to have a hat. If there was a reason for his preferring
liberal to conservative views, which were held also by many of his circle, it arose

viii
not from his considering liberalism more rational, but from its being in closer accordance with his manner of life. e liberal party said that in Russia everything
is wrong, and certainly Stepan Arkadyevitch had many debts and was decidedly
short of money. e liberal party said that marriage is an institution quite out of
date, and that it needs reconstruction; and family life certainly aﬀorded Stepan
Arkadyevitch lile gratiﬁcation, and forced him into lying and hypocrisy, which
was so repulsive to his nature. e liberal party said, or rather allowed it to be
understood, that religion is only a curb to keep in check the barbarous classes of
the people; and Stepan Arkadyevitch could not get through even a short service
without his legs aching from standing up, and could never make out what was the
object of all the terrible and high-ﬂown language about another world when life
might be so very amusing in this world. And with all this, Stepan Arkadyevitch,
who liked a joke, was fond of puzzling a plain man by saying that if he prided himself on his origin, he ought not to stop at Rurik and disown the ﬁrst founder of his
family—the monkey. And so Liberalism had become a habit of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s, and he liked his newspaper, as he did his cigar aer dinner, for the slight
fog it diﬀused in his brain. He read the leading article, in which it was maintained
that it was quite senseless in our day to raise an outcry that radicalism was threatening to swallow up all conservative elements, and that the government ought to
take measures to crush the revolutionary hydra; that, on the contrary, "in our
opinion the danger lies not in that fantastic revolutionary hydra, but in the obstinacy of traditionalism clogging progress," etc., etc. He read another article, too, a
ﬁnancial one, which alluded to Bentham and Mill, and dropped some innuendoes
reﬂecting on the ministry. With his characteristic quickwiedness he caught the
dri of each innuendo, divined whence it came, at whom and on what ground
it was aimed, and that aﬀorded him, as it always did, a certain satisfaction. But
today that satisfaction was embiered by Matrona Philimonovna’s advice and the
unsatisfactory state of the household. He read, too, that Count Beist was rumored
to have le for Wiesbaden, and that one need have no more gray hair, and of the
sale of a light carriage, and of a young person seeking a situation; but these items
of information did not give him, as usual, a quiet, ironical gratiﬁcation. Having
ﬁnished the paper, a second cup of coﬀee and a roll and buer, he got up, shaking
the crumbs of the roll oﬀ his waistcoat; and, squaring his broad chest, he smiled
joyously: not because there was anything particularly agreeable in his mind—the
joyous smile was evoked by a good digestion.
But this joyous smile at once recalled everything to him, and he grew
thoughtful.
Two childish voices (Stepan Arkadyevitch recognized the voices of Grisha,
his youngest boy, and Tanya, his eldest girl) were heard outside the door. ey
were carrying something, and dropped it.

ix
"I told you not to sit passengers on the roof," said the lile girl in English;
"there, pick them up!"
"Everything’s in confusion," thought Stepan Arkadyevitch; "there are the
children running about by themselves." And going to the door, he called them.
ey threw down the box, that represented a train, and came in to their father.
e lile girl, her father’s favorite, ran up boldly, embraced him, and hung
laughingly on his neck, enjoying as she always did the smell of scent that came
from his whiskers. At last the lile girl kissed his face, which was ﬂushed from his
stooping posture and beaming with tenderness, loosed her hands, and was about
to run away again; but her father held her back.
"How is mamma?" he asked, passing his hand over his daughter’s smooth,
so lile neck. "Good morning," he said, smiling to the boy, who had come up
to greet him. He was conscious that he loved the boy less, and always tried to
be fair; but the boy felt it, and did not respond with a smile to his father’s chilly
smile.
"Mamma? She is up," answered the girl.
Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed. "at means that she’s not slept again all
night," he thought.
"Well, is she cheerful?"
e lile girl knew that there was a quarrel between her father and mother,
and that her mother could not be cheerful, and that her father must be aware
of this, and that he was pretending when he asked about it so lightly. And she
blushed for her father. He at once perceived it, and blushed too.
"I don’t know," she said. "She did not say we must do our lessons, but she
said we were to go for a walk with Miss Hoole to grandmamma’s."
"Well, go, Tanya, my darling. Oh, wait a minute, though," he said, still holding her and stroking her so lile hand.
He took oﬀ the mantelpiece, where he had put it yesterday, a lile box of
sweets, and gave her two, picking out her favorites, a chocolate and a fondant.
"For Grisha?" said the lile girl, pointing to the chocolate.
"Yes, yes." And still stroking her lile shoulder, he kissed her on the roots of
her hair and neck, and let her go.
"e carriage is ready," said Matvey; "but there’s some one to see you with
a petition."
"Been here long?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Half an hour."
"How many times have I told you to tell me at once?"
"One must let you drink your coﬀee in peace, at least," said Matvey, in the
aﬀectionately gruﬀ tone with which it was impossible to be angry.
"Well, show the person up at once," said Oblonsky, frowning with vexation.

x
e petitioner, the widow of a staﬀ captain Kalinin, came with a request
impossible and unreasonable; but Stepan Arkadyevitch, as he generally did, made
her sit down, heard her to the end aentively without interrupting her, and gave
her detailed advice as to how and to whom to apply, and even wrote her, in his
large, sprawling, good and legible hand, a conﬁdent and ﬂuent lile note to a personage who might be of use to her. Having got rid of the staﬀ captain’s widow,
Stepan Arkadyevitch took his hat and stopped to recollect whether he had forgotten anything. It appeared that he had forgoen nothing except what he wanted
to forget—his wife.
"Ah, yes!" He bowed his head, and his handsome face assumed a harassed
expression. "To go, or not to go!" he said to himself; and an inner voice told him he
must not go, that nothing could come of it but falsity; that to amend, to set right
their relations was impossible, because it was impossible to make her aractive
again and able to inspire love, or to make him an old man, not susceptible to love.
Except deceit and lying nothing could come of it now; and deceit and lying were
opposed to his nature.
"It must be some time, though: it can’t go on like this," he said, trying to
give himself courage. He squared his chest, took out a cigaree, took two whiﬀs
at it, ﬂung it into a mother-of-pearl ashtray, and with rapid steps walked through
the drawing room, and opened the other door into his wife’s bedroom.

Chapter 
Darya Alexandrovna, in a dressing jacket, and with her now scanty, once luxuriant and beautiful hair fastened up with hairpins on the nape of her neck, with
a sunken, thin face and large, startled eyes, which looked prominent from the
thinness of her face, was standing among a lier of all sorts of things scaered
all over the room, before an open bureau, from which she was taking something.
Hearing her husband’s steps, she stopped, looking towards the door, and trying
assiduously to give her features a severe and contemptuous expression. She felt
she was afraid of him, and afraid of the coming interview. She was just aempting
to do what she had aempted to do ten times already in these last three days—to
sort out the children’s things and her own, so as to take them to her mother’s—and
again she could not bring herself to do this; but now again, as each time before,
she kept saying to herself, "that things cannot go on like this, that she must take
some step" to punish him, put him to shame, avenge on him some lile part at
least of the suﬀering he had caused her. She still continued to tell herself that she
should leave him, but she was conscious that this was impossible; it was impossible because she could not get out of the habit of regarding him as her husband

xi
and loving him. Besides this, she realized that if even here in her own house she
could hardly manage to look aer her ﬁve children properly, they would be still
worse oﬀ where she was going with them all. As it was, even in the course of
these three days, the youngest was unwell from being given unwholesome soup,
and the others had almost gone without their dinner the day before. She was
conscious that it was impossible to go away; but, cheating herself, she went on
all the same sorting out her things and pretending she was going.
Seeing her husband, she dropped her hands into the drawer of the bureau as
though looking for something, and only looked round at him when he had come
quite up to her. But her face, to which she tried to give a severe and resolute
expression, betrayed bewilderment and suﬀering.
"Dolly!" he said in a subdued and timid voice. He bent his head towards
his shoulder and tried to look pitiful and humble, but for all that he was radiant
with freshness and health. In a rapid glance she scanned his ﬁgure that beamed
with health and freshness. "Yes, he is happy and content!" she thought; "while
I…. And that disgusting good nature, which every one likes him for and praises—I
hate that good nature of his," she thought. Her mouth stiﬀened, the muscles of
the cheek contracted on the right side of her pale, nervous face.
"What do you want?" she said in a rapid, deep, unnatural voice.
"Dolly!" he repeated, with a quiver in his voice. "Anna is coming today."
"Well, what is that to me? I can’t see her!" she cried.
"But you must, really, Dolly…"
"Go away, go away, go away!" she shrieked, not looking at him, as though
this shriek were called up by physical pain.
Stepan Arkadyevitch could be calm when he thought of his wife, he could
hope that she would come round, as Matvey expressed it, and could quietly go on
reading his paper and drinking his coﬀee; but when he saw her tortured, suﬀering
face, heard the tone of her voice, submissive to fate and full of despair, there was
a catch in his breath and a lump in his throat, and his eyes began to shine with
tears.
"My God! what have I done? Dolly! For God’s sake!…. You know…." He
could not go on; there was a sob in his throat.
She shut the bureau with a slam, and glanced at him.
"Dolly, what can I say?…. One thing: forgive… Remember, cannot nine
years of my life atone for an instant…."
She dropped her eyes and listened, expecting what he would say, as it were
beseeching him in some way or other to make her believe diﬀerently.
"—instant of passion?" he said, and would have gone on, but at that word,
as at a pang of physical pain, her lips stiﬀened again, and again the muscles of her
right cheek worked.

xii
"Go away, go out of the room!" she shrieked still more shrilly, "and don’t
talk to me of your passion and your loathsomeness."
She tried to go out, but toered, and clung to the back of a chair to support
herself. His face relaxed, his lips swelled, his eyes were swimming with tears.
"Dolly!" he said, sobbing now; "for mercy’s sake, think of the children; they
are not to blame! I am to blame, and punish me, make me expiate my fault. Anything I can do, I am ready to do anything! I am to blame, no words can express
how much I am to blame! But, Dolly, forgive me!"
She sat down. He listened to her hard, heavy breathing, and he was unutterably sorry for her. She tried several times to begin to speak, but could not. He
waited.
"You remember the children, Stiva, to play with them; but I remember them,
and know that this means their ruin," she said—obviously one of the phrases she
had more than once repeated to herself in the course of the last few days.
She had called him "Stiva," and he glanced at her with gratitude, and moved
to take her hand, but she drew back from him with aversion.
"I think of the children, and for that reason I would do anything in the world
to save them, but I don’t myself know how to save them. By taking them away
from their father, or by leaving them with a vicious father—yes, a vicious father….
Tell me, aer what … has happened, can we live together? Is that possible? Tell
me, eh, is it possible?" she repeated, raising her voice, "aer my husband, the
father of my children, enters into a love aﬀair with his own children’s governess?"
"But what could I do? what could I do?" he kept saying in a pitiful voice,
not knowing what he was saying, as his head sank lower and lower.
"You are loathsome to me, repulsive!" she shrieked, geing more and more
heated. "Your tears mean nothing! You have never loved me; you have neither
heart nor honorable feeling! You are hateful to me, disgusting, a stranger—yes,
a complete stranger!" With pain and wrath she uered the word so terrible to
herself—stranger.
He looked at her, and the fury expressed in her face alarmed and amazed
him. He did not understand how his pity for her exasperated her. She saw in him
sympathy for her, but not love. "No, she hates me. She will not forgive me," he
thought.
"It is awful! awful!" he said.
At that moment in the next room a child began to cry; probably it had fallen
down. Darya Alexandrovna listened, and her face suddenly soened.
She seemed to be pulling herself together for a few seconds, as though she
did not know where she was, and what she was doing, and geing up rapidly, she
moved towards the door.
"Well, she loves my child," he thought, noticing the change of her face at the

xiii
child’s cry, "my child: how can she hate me?"
"Dolly, one word more," he said, following her.
"If you come near me, I will call in the servants, the children! ey may all
know you are a scoundrel! I am going away at once, and you may live here with
your mistress!"
And she went out, slamming the door.
Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed, wiped his face, and with a subdued tread
walked out of the room. "Matvey says she will come round; but how? I don’t
see the least chance of it. Ah, oh, how horrible it is! And how vulgarly she
shouted," he said to himself, remembering her shriek and the words—"scoundrel"
and "mistress." "And very likely the maids were listening! Horribly vulgar! horrible!" Stepan Arkadyevitch stood a few seconds alone, wiped his face, squared his
chest, and walked out of the room.
It was Friday, and in the dining room the German watchmaker was winding
up the clock. Stepan Arkadyevitch remembered his joke about this punctual, bald
watchmaker, "that the German was wound up for a whole lifetime himself, to
wind up watches," and he smiled. Stepan Arkadyevitch was fond of a joke: "And
maybe she will come round! at’s a good expression, ‘come round,’" he thought.
"I must repeat that."
"Matvey!" he shouted. "Arrange everything with Darya in the siing room
for Anna Arkadyevna," he said to Matvey when he came in.
"Yes, sir."
Stepan Arkadyevitch put on his fur coat and went out onto the steps.
"You won’t dine at home?" said Matvey, seeing him oﬀ.
"at’s as it happens. But here’s for the housekeeping," he said, taking ten
roubles from his pocketbook. "at’ll be enough."
"Enough or not enough, we must make it do," said Matvey, slamming the
carriage door and stepping back onto the steps.
Darya Alexandrovna meanwhile having paciﬁed the child, and knowing
from the sound of the carriage that he had gone oﬀ, went back again to her bedroom. It was her solitary refuge from the household cares which crowded upon
her directly she went out from it. Even now, in the short time she had been in
the nursery, the English governess and Matrona Philimonovna had succeeded in
puing several questions to her, which did not admit of delay, and which only
she could answer: "What were the children to put on for their walk? Should they
have any milk? Should not a new cook be sent for?"
"Ah, let me alone, let me alone!" she said, and going back to her bedroom she
sat down in the same place as she had sat when talking to her husband, clasping
tightly her thin hands with the rings that slipped down on her bony ﬁngers, and
fell to going over in her memory all the conversation. "He has gone! But has he

xiv
broken it oﬀ with her?" she thought. "Can it be he sees her? Why didn’t I ask
him! No, no, reconciliation is impossible. Even if we remain in the same house,
we are strangers—strangers forever!" She repeated again with special signiﬁcance
the word so dreadful to her. "And how I loved him! my God, how I loved him!….
How I loved him! And now don’t I love him? Don’t I love him more than before?
e most horrible thing is," she began, but did not ﬁnish her thought, because
Matrona Philimonovna put her head in at the door.
"Let us send for my brother," she said; "he can get a dinner anyway, or we
shall have the children geing nothing to eat till six again, like yesterday."
"Very well, I will come directly and see about it. But did you send for some
new milk?"
And Darya Alexandrovna plunged into the duties of the day, and drowned
her grief in them for a time.

Chapter 
Stepan Arkadyevitch had learned easily at school, thanks to his excellent abilities,
but he had been idle and mischievous, and therefore was one of the lowest in his
class. But in spite of his habitually dissipated mode of life, his inferior grade in
the service, and his comparative youth, he occupied the honorable and lucrative
position of president of one of the government boards at Moscow. is post he had
received through his sister Anna’s husband, Alexey Alexandrovitch Karenin, who
held one of the most important positions in the ministry to whose department the
Moscow oﬃce belonged. But if Karenin had not got his brother-in-law this berth,
then through a hundred other personages—brothers, sisters, cousins, uncles, and
aunts—Stiva Oblonsky would have received this post, or some other similar one,
together with the salary of six thousand absolutely needful for him, as his aﬀairs,
in spite of his wife’s considerable property, were in an embarrassed condition.
Half Moscow and Petersburg were friends and relations of Stepan Arkadyevitch. He was born in the midst of those who had been and are the powerful ones
of this world. One-third of the men in the government, the older men, had been
friends of his father’s, and had known him in peicoats; another third were his
intimate chums, and the remainder were friendly acquaintances. Consequently
the distributors of earthly blessings in the shape of places, rents, shares, and such,
were all his friends, and could not overlook one of their own set; and Oblonsky
had no need to make any special exertion to get a lucrative post. He had only not
to refuse things, not to show jealousy, not to be quarrelsome or take oﬀense, all of
which from his characteristic good nature he never did. It would have struck him
as absurd if he had been told that he would not get a position with the salary he

xv
required, especially as he expected nothing out of the way; he only wanted what
the men of his own age and standing did get, and he was no worse qualiﬁed for
performing duties of the kind than any other man.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was not merely liked by all who knew him for his good
humor, but for his bright disposition, and his unquestionable honesty. In him, in
his handsome, radiant ﬁgure, his sparkling eyes, black hair and eyebrows, and the
white and red of his face, there was something which produced a physical eﬀect of
kindliness and good humor on the people who met him. "Aha! Stiva! Oblonsky!
Here he is!" was almost always said with a smile of delight on meeting him. Even
though it happened at times that aer a conversation with him it seemed that
nothing particularly delightful had happened, the next day, and the next, every
one was just as delighted at meeting him again.
Aer ﬁlling for three years the post of president of one of the government
boards at Moscow, Stepan Arkadyevitch had won the respect, as well as the liking,
of his fellow-oﬃcials, subordinates, and superiors, and all who had had business
with him. e principal qualities in Stepan Arkadyevitch which had gained him
this universal respect in the service consisted, in the ﬁrst place, of his extreme
indulgence for others, founded on a consciousness of his own shortcomings; secondly, of his perfect liberalism—not the liberalism he read of in the papers, but
the liberalism that was in his blood, in virtue of which he treated all men perfectly equally and exactly the same, whatever their fortune or calling might be;
and thirdly—the most important point—his complete indiﬀerence to the business
in which he was engaged, in consequence of which he was never carried away,
and never made mistakes.
On reaching the oﬃces of the board, Stepan Arkadyevitch, escorted by a
deferential porter with a portfolio, went into his lile private room, put on his
uniform, and went into the boardroom. e clerks and copyists all rose, greeting him with good-humored deference. Stepan Arkadyevitch moved quickly, as
ever, to his place, shook hands with his colleagues, and sat down. He made a joke
or two, and talked just as much as was consistent with due decorum, and began
work. No one knew beer than Stepan Arkadyevitch how to hit on the exact line
between freedom, simplicity, and oﬃcial stiﬀness necessary for the agreeable conduct of business. A secretary, with the good-humored deference common to every
one in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s oﬃce, came up with papers, and began to speak in
the familiar and easy tone which had been introduced by Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"We have succeeded in geing the information from the government department of Penza. Here, would you care?…."
"You’ve got them at last?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laying his ﬁnger on
the paper. "Now, gentlemen…."
And the siing of the board began.

xvi
"If they knew," he thought, bending his head with a signiﬁcant air as he
listened to the report, "what a guilty lile boy their president was half an hour
ago." And his eyes were laughing during the reading of the report. Till two o’clock
the siing would go on without a break, and at two o’clock there would be an
interval and luncheon.
It was not yet two, when the large glass doors of the boardroom suddenly
opened and someone came in.
All the oﬃcials siing on the further side under the portrait of the Tsar
and the eagle, delighted at any distraction, looked round at the door; but the
doorkeeper standing at the door at once drove out the intruder, and closed the
glass door aer him.
When the case had been read through, Stepan Arkadyevitch got up and
stretched, and by way of tribute to the liberalism of the times took out a cigaree
in the boardroom and went into his private room. Two of the members of the
board, the old veteran in the service, Nikitin, and the Kammerjunker Grinevit,
went in with him.
"We shall have time to ﬁnish aer lunch," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"To be sure we shall!" said Nikitin.
"A prey sharp fellow this Fomin must be," said Grinevitch of one of the
persons taking part in the case they were examining.
Stepan Arkadyevitch frowned at Grinevitch’s words, giving him thereby to
understand that it was improper to pass judgment prematurely, and made him no
reply.
"Who was that came in?" he asked the doorkeeper.
"Someone, your excellency, crept in without permission directly my back
was turned. He was asking for you. I told him: when the members come out,
then…."
"Where is he?"
"Maybe he’s gone into the passage, but here he comes anyway. at is
he," said the doorkeeper, pointing to a strongly built, broad-shouldered man with
a curly beard, who, without taking oﬀ his sheepskin cap, was running lightly
and rapidly up the worn steps of the stone staircase. One of the members going
down—a lean oﬃcial with a portfolio—stood out of his way and looked disapprovingly at the legs of the stranger, then glanced inquiringly at Oblonsky.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was standing at the top of the stairs. His goodnaturedly beaming face above the embroidered collar of his uniform beamed more
than ever when he recognized the man coming up.
"Why, it’s actually you, Levin, at last!" he said with a friendly mocking smile,
scanning Levin as he approached. "How is it you have deigned to look me up
in this den?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and not content with shaking hands, he

xvii
kissed his friend. "Have you been here long?"
"I have just come, and very much wanted to see you," said Levin, looking
shyly and at the same time angrily and uneasily around.
"Well, let’s go into my room," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who knew his
friend’s sensitive and irritable shyness, and, taking his arm, he drew him along,
as though guiding him through dangers.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was on familiar terms with almost all his acquaintances, and called almost all of them by their Christian names: old men of sixty,
boys of twenty, actors, ministers, merchants, and adjutant-generals, so that many
of his intimate chums were to be found at the extreme ends of the social ladder,
and would have been very much surprised to learn that they had, through the
medium of Oblonsky, something in common. He was the familiar friend of everyone with whom he took a glass of champagne, and he took a glass of champagne
with everyone, and when in consequence he met any of his disreputable chums,
as he used in joke to call many of his friends, in the presence of his subordinates,
he well knew how, with his characteristic tact, to diminish the disagreeable impression made on them. Levin was not a disreputable chum, but Oblonsky, with
his ready tact, felt that Levin fancied he might not care to show his intimacy with
him before his subordinates, and so he made haste to take him oﬀ into his room.
Levin was almost of the same age as Oblonsky; their intimacy did not rest
merely on champagne. Levin had been the friend and companion of his early
youth. ey were fond of one another in spite of the diﬀerence of their characters
and tastes, as friends are fond of one another who have been together in early
youth. But in spite of this, each of them—as is oen the way with men who have
selected careers of diﬀerent kinds—though in discussion he would even justify the
other’s career, in his heart despised it. It seemed to each of them that the life he led
himself was the only real life, and the life led by his friend was a mere phantasm.
Oblonsky could not restrain a slight mocking smile at the sight of Levin. How
oen he had seen him come up to Moscow from the country where he was doing
something, but what precisely Stepan Arkadyevitch could never quite make out,
and indeed he took no interest in the maer. Levin arrived in Moscow always
excited and in a hurry, rather ill at ease and irritated by his own want of ease,
and for the most part with a perfectly new, unexpected view of things. Stepan
Arkadyevitch laughed at this, and liked it. In the same way Levin in his heart
despised the town mode of life of his friend, and his oﬃcial duties, which he
laughed at, and regarded as triﬂing. But the diﬀerence was that Oblonsky, as he
was doing the same as every one did, laughed complacently and good-humoredly,
while Levin laughed without complacency and sometimes angrily.
"We have long been expecting you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, going into
his room and leing Levin’s hand go as though to show that here all danger was

xviii
over. "I am very, very glad to see you," he went on. "Well, how are you? Eh?
When did you come?"
Levin was silent, looking at the unknown faces of Oblonsky’s two companions, and especially at the hand of the elegant Grinevitch, which had such long
white ﬁngers, such long yellow ﬁlbert-shaped nails, and such huge shining studs
on the shirt-cuﬀ, that apparently they absorbed all his aention, and allowed him
no freedom of thought. Oblonsky noticed this at once, and smiled.
"Ah, to be sure, let me introduce you," he said. "My colleagues: Philip Ivanitch Nikitin, Mihail Stanislavitch Grinevitch"—and turning to Levin—"a district
councilor, a modern district councilman, a gymnast who lis thirteen stone with
one hand, a cale-breeder and sportsman, and my friend, Konstantin Dmitrievitch
Levin, the brother of Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev."
"Delighted," said the veteran.
"I have the honor of knowing your brother, Sergey Ivanovitch," said
Grinevitch, holding out his slender hand with its long nails.
Levin frowned, shook hands coldly, and at once turned to Oblonsky. ough
he had a great respect for his half-brother, an author well known to all Russia, he
could not endure it when people treated him not as Konstantin Levin, but as the
brother of the celebrated Koznishev.
"No, I am no longer a district councilor. I have quarreled with them all, and
don’t go to the meetings any more," he said, turning to Oblonsky.
"You’ve been quick about it!" said Oblonsky with a smile. "But how? why?"
"It’s a long story. I will tell you some time," said Levin, but he began telling
him at once. "Well, to put it shortly, I was convinced that nothing was really done
by the district councils, or ever could be," he began, as though some one had just
insulted him. "On one side it’s a plaything; they play at being a parliament, and
I’m neither young enough nor old enough to ﬁnd amusement in playthings; and
on the other side" (he stammered) "it’s a means for the coterie of the district to
make money. Formerly they had wardships, courts of justice, now they have the
district council—not in the form of bribes, but in the form of unearned salary," he
said, as hotly as though someone of those present had opposed his opinion.
"Aha! You’re in a new phase again, I see—a conservative," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch. "However, we can go into that later."
"Yes, later. But I wanted to see you," said Levin, looking with hatred at
Grinevitch’s hand.
Stepan Arkadyevitch gave a scarcely perceptible smile.
"How was it you used to say you would never wear European dress again?"
he said, scanning his new suit, obviously cut by a French tailor. "Ah! I see: a new
phase."
Levin suddenly blushed, not as grown men blush, slightly, without being

xix
themselves aware of it, but as boys blush, feeling that they are ridiculous through
their shyness, and consequently ashamed of it and blushing still more, almost to
the point of tears. And it was so strange to see this sensible, manly face in such a
childish plight, that Oblonsky le oﬀ looking at him.
"Oh, where shall we meet? You know I want very much to talk to you," said
Levin.
Oblonsky seemed to ponder.
"I’ll tell you what: let’s go to Gurin’s to lunch, and there we can talk. I am
free till three."
"No," answered Levin, aer an instant’s thought, "I have got to go on somewhere else."
"All right, then, let’s dine together."
"Dine together? But I have nothing very particular, only a few words to say,
and a question I want to ask you, and we can have a talk aerwards."
"Well, say the few words, then, at once, and we’ll gossip aer dinner."
"Well, it’s this," said Levin; "but it’s of no importance, though."
His face all at once took an expression of anger from the eﬀort he was making to surmount his shyness.
"What are the Shtcherbatskys doing? Everything as it used to be?" he said.
Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had long known that Levin was in love with his
sister-in-law, Kiy, gave a hardly perceptible smile, and his eyes sparkled merrily.
"You said a few words, but I can’t answer in a few words, because…. Excuse
me a minute…"
A secretary came in, with respectful familiarity and the modest consciousness, characteristic of every secretary, of superiority to his chief in the knowledge
of their business; he went up to Oblonsky with some papers, and began, under
pretense of asking a question, to explain some objection. Stepan Arkadyevitch,
without hearing him out, laid his hand genially on the secretary’s sleeve.
"No, you do as I told you," he said, soening his words with a smile, and with
a brief explanation of his view of the maer he turned away from the papers, and
said: "So do it that way, if you please, Zahar Nikititch."
e secretary retired in confusion. During the consultation with the secretary Levin had completely recovered from his embarrassment. He was standing
with his elbows on the back of a chair, and on his face was a look of ironical
aention.
"I don’t understand it, I don’t understand it," he said.
"What don’t you understand?" said Oblonsky, smiling as brightly as ever,
and picking up a cigaree. He expected some queer outburst from Levin.
"I don’t understand what you are doing," said Levin, shrugging his shoulders. "How can you do it seriously?"

xx
"Why not?"
"Why, because there’s nothing in it."
"You think so, but we’re overwhelmed with work."
"On paper. But, there, you’ve a gi for it," added Levin.
"at’s to say, you think there’s a lack of something in me?"
"Perhaps so," said Levin. "But all the same I admire your grandeur, and am
proud that I’ve a friend in such a great person. You’ve not answered my question,
though," he went on, with a desperate eﬀort looking Oblonsky straight in the face.
"Oh, that’s all very well. You wait a bit, and you’ll come to this yourself.
It’s very nice for you to have over six thousand acres in the Karazinsky district,
and such muscles, and the freshness of a girl of twelve; still you’ll be one of us
one day. Yes, as to your question, there is no change, but it’s a pity you’ve been
away so long."
"Oh, why so?" Levin queried, panic-stricken.
"Oh, nothing," responded Oblonsky. "We’ll talk it over. But what’s brought
you up to town?"
"Oh, we’ll talk about that, too, later on," said Levin, reddening again up to
his ears.
"All right. I see," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "I should ask you to come to
us, you know, but my wife’s not quite the thing. But I tell you what; if you want
to see them, they’re sure now to be at the Zoological Gardens from four to ﬁve.
Kiy skates. You drive along there, and I’ll come and fetch you, and we’ll go and
dine somewhere together."
"Capital. So good-bye till then."
"Now mind, you’ll forget, I know you, or rush oﬀ home to the country!"
Stepan Arkadyevitch called out laughing.
"No, truly!"
And Levin went out of the room, only when he was in the doorway remembering that he had forgoen to take leave of Oblonsky’s colleagues.
"at gentleman must be a man of great energy," said Grinevitch, when
Levin had gone away.
"Yes, my dear boy," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, nodding his head, "he’s a
lucky fellow! Over six thousand acres in the Karazinsky district; everything before him; and what youth and vigor! Not like some of us."
"You have a great deal to complain of, haven’t you, Stepan Arkadyevitch?"
"Ah, yes, I’m in a poor way, a bad way," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a
heavy sigh.

Chapter 

xxi
When Oblonsky asked Levin what had brought him to town, Levin blushed, and
was furious with himself for blushing, because he could not answer, "I have come
to make your sister-in-law an oﬀer," though that was precisely what he had come
for.
e families of the Levins and the Shtcherbatskys were old, noble Moscow
families, and had always been on intimate and friendly terms. is intimacy had
grown still closer during Levin’s student days. He had both prepared for the university with the young Prince Shtcherbatsky, the brother of Kiy and Dolly, and
had entered at the same time with him. In those days Levin used oen to be in
the Shtcherbatskys’ house, and he was in love with the Shtcherbatsky household.
Strange as it may appear, it was with the household, the family, that Konstantin
Levin was in love, especially with the feminine half of the household. Levin did
not remember his own mother, and his only sister was older than he was, so that
it was in the Shtcherbatskys’ house that he saw for the ﬁrst time that inner life of
an old, noble, cultivated, and honorable family of which he had been deprived by
the death of his father and mother. All the members of that family, especially the
feminine half, were pictured by him, as it were, wrapped about with a mysterious
poetical veil, and he not only perceived no defects whatever in them, but under
the poetical veil that shrouded them he assumed the existence of the loiest sentiments and every possible perfection. Why it was the three young ladies had one
day to speak French, and the next English; why it was that at certain hours they
played by turns on the piano, the sounds of which were audible in their brother’s
room above, where the students used to work; why they were visited by those
professors of French literature, of music, of drawing, of dancing; why at certain
hours all the three young ladies, with Mademoiselle Linon, drove in the coach to
the Tversky boulevard, dressed in their satin cloaks, Dolly in a long one, Natalia
in a half-long one, and Kiy in one so short that her shapely legs in tightly-drawn
red stockings were visible to all beholders; why it was they had to walk about the
Tversky boulevard escorted by a footman with a gold cockade in his hat—all this
and much more that was done in their mysterious world he did not understand,
but he was sure that everything that was done there was very good, and he was
in love precisely with the mystery of the proceedings.
In his student days he had all but been in love with the eldest, Dolly, but
she was soon married to Oblonsky. en he began being in love with the second.
He felt, as it were, that he had to be in love with one of the sisters, only he could
not quite make out which. But Natalia, too, had hardly made her appearance in
the world when she married the diplomat Lvov. Kiy was still a child when Levin
le the university. Young Shtcherbatsky went into the navy, was drowned in the
Baltic, and Levin’s relations with the Shtcherbatskys, in spite of his friendship
with Oblonsky, became less intimate. But when early in the winter of this year

xxii
Levin came to Moscow, aer a year in the country, and saw the Shtcherbatskys,
he realized which of the three sisters he was indeed destined to love.
One would have thought that nothing could be simpler than for him, a man
of good family, rather rich than poor, and thirty-two years old, to make the young
Princess Shtcherbatskaya an oﬀer of marriage; in all likelihood he would at once
have been looked upon as a good match. But Levin was in love, and so it seemed
to him that Kiy was so perfect in every respect that she was a creature far above
everything earthly; and that he was a creature so low and so earthly that it could
not even be conceived that other people and she herself could regard him as worthy of her.
Aer spending two months in Moscow in a state of enchantment, seeing
Kiy almost every day in society, into which he went so as to meet her, he abruptly
decided that it could not be, and went back to the country.
Levin’s conviction that it could not be was founded on the idea that in the
eyes of her family he was a disadvantageous and worthless match for the charming Kiy, and that Kiy herself could not love him. In her family’s eyes he had
no ordinary, deﬁnite career and position in society, while his contemporaries by
this time, when he was thirty-two, were already, one a colonel, and another a
professor, another director of a bank and railways, or president of a board like
Oblonsky. But he (he knew very well how he must appear to others) was a country gentleman, occupied in breeding cale, shooting game, and building barns; in
other words, a fellow of no ability, who had not turned out well, and who was doing just what, according to the ideas of the world, is done by people ﬁt for nothing
else.
e mysterious, enchanting Kiy herself could not love such an ugly person
as he conceived himself to be, and, above all, such an ordinary, in no way striking
person. Moreover, his aitude to Kiy in the past—the aitude of a grown-up
person to a child, arising from his friendship with her brother—seemed to him yet
another obstacle to love. An ugly, good-natured man, as he considered himself,
might, he supposed, be liked as a friend; but to be loved with such a love as that
with which he loved Kiy, one would need to be a handsome and, still more, a
distinguished man.
He had heard that women oen did care for ugly and ordinary men, but he
did not believe it, for he judged by himself, and he could not himself have loved
any but beautiful, mysterious, and exceptional women.
But aer spending two months alone in the country, he was convinced that
this was not one of those passions of which he had had experience in his early
youth; that this feeling gave him not an instant’s rest; that he could not live without deciding the question, would she or would she not be his wife, and that his
despair had arisen only from his own imaginings, that he had no sort of proof

xxiii
that he would be rejected. And he had now come to Moscow with a ﬁrm determination to make an oﬀer, and get married if he were accepted. Or … he could
not conceive what would become of him if he were rejected.

Chapter 
On arriving in Moscow by a morning train, Levin had put up at the house of his
elder half-brother, Koznishev. Aer changing his clothes he went down to his
brother’s study, intending to talk to him at once about the object of his visit, and
to ask his advice; but his brother was not alone. With him there was a well-known
professor of philosophy, who had come from Harkov expressly to clear up a difference that had arisen between them on a very important philosophical question.
e professor was carrying on a hot crusade against materialists. Sergey Koznishev had been following this crusade with interest, and aer reading the professor’s last article, he had wrien him a leer stating his objections. He accused the
professor of making too great concessions to the materialists. And the professor
had promptly appeared to argue the maer out. e point in discussion was the
question then in vogue: Is there a line to be drawn between psychological and
physiological phenomena in man? and if so, where?
Sergey Ivanovitch met his brother with the smile of chilly friendliness he
always had for everyone, and introducing him to the professor, went on with the
conversation.
A lile man in spectacles, with a narrow forehead, tore himself from the
discussion for an instant to greet Levin, and then went on talking without paying
any further aention to him. Levin sat down to wait till the professor should go,
but he soon began to get interested in the subject under discussion.
Levin had come across the magazine articles about which they were disputing, and had read them, interested in them as a development of the ﬁrst principles
of science, familiar to him as a natural science student at the university. But he
had never connected these scientiﬁc deductions as to the origin of man as an animal, as to reﬂex action, biology, and sociology, with those questions as to the
meaning of life and death to himself, which had of late been more and more oen
in his mind.
As he listened to his brother’s argument with the professor, he noticed that
they connected these scientiﬁc questions with those spiritual problems, that at
times they almost touched on the laer; but every time they were close upon what
seemed to him the chief point, they promptly beat a hasty retreat, and plunged
again into a sea of subtle distinctions, reservations, quotations, allusions, and appeals to authorities, and it was with diﬃculty that he understood what they were

xxiv
talking about.
"I cannot admit it," said Sergey Ivanovitch, with his habitual clearness, precision of expression, and elegance of phrase. "I cannot in any case agree with Keiss
that my whole conception of the external world has been derived from perceptions. e most fundamental idea, the idea of existence, has not been received by
me through sensation; indeed, there is no special sense-organ for the transmission
of such an idea."
"Yes, but they—Wurt, and Knaust, and Pripasov—would answer that your
consciousness of existence is derived from the conjunction of all your sensations,
that that consciousness of existence is the result of your sensations. Wurt, indeed,
says plainly that, assuming there are no sensations, it follows that there is no idea
of existence."
"I maintain the contrary," began Sergey Ivanovitch.
But here it seemed to Levin that just as they were close upon the real point of
the maer, they were again retreating, and he made up his mind to put a question
to the professor.
"According to that, if my senses are annihilated, if my body is dead, I can
have no existence of any sort?" he queried.
e professor, in annoyance, and, as it were, mental suﬀering at the interruption, looked round at the strange inquirer, more like a bargeman than
a philosopher, and turned his eyes upon Sergey Ivanovitch, as though to ask:
What’s one to say to him? But Sergey Ivanovitch, who had been talking with far
less heat and one-sidedness than the professor, and who had suﬃcient breadth
of mind to answer the professor, and at the same time to comprehend the simple
and natural point of view from which the question was put, smiled and said:
"at question we have no right to answer as yet."
"We have not the requisite data," chimed in the professor, and he went back
to his argument. "No," he said; "I would point out the fact that if, as Pripasov
directly asserts, perception is based on sensation, then we are bound to distinguish
sharply between these two conceptions."
Levin listened no more, and simply waited for the professor to go.

Chapter 
When the professor had gone, Sergey Ivanovitch turned to his brother.
"Delighted that you’ve come. For some time, is it? How’s your farming
geing on?"
Levin knew that his elder brother took lile interest in farming, and only
put the question in deference to him, and so he only told him about the sale of his

xxv
wheat and money maers.
Levin had meant to tell his brother of his determination to get married,
and to ask his advice; he had indeed ﬁrmly resolved to do so. But aer seeing
his brother, listening to his conversation with the professor, hearing aerwards
the unconsciously patronizing tone in which his brother questioned him about
agricultural maers (their mother’s property had not been divided, and Levin
took charge of both their shares), Levin felt that he could not for some reason
begin to talk to him of his intention of marrying. He felt that his brother would
not look at it as he would have wished him to.
"Well, how is your district council doing?" asked Sergey Ivanovitch, who
was greatly interested in these local boards and aached great importance to
them.
"I really don’t know."
"What! Why, surely you’re a member of the board?"
"No, I’m not a member now; I’ve resigned," answered Levin, "and I no longer
aend the meetings."
"What a pity!" commented Sergey Ivanovitch, frowning.
Levin in self-defense began to describe what took place in the meetings in
his district.
"at’s how it always is!" Sergey Ivanovitch interrupted him. "We Russians
are always like that. Perhaps it’s our strong point, really, the faculty of seeing our
own shortcomings; but we overdo it, we comfort ourselves with irony which we
always have on the tip of our tongues. All I say is, give such rights as our local
self-government to any other European people—why, the Germans or the English
would have worked their way to freedom from them, while we simply turn them
into ridicule."
"But how can it be helped?" said Levin penitently. "It was my last eﬀort.
And I did try with all my soul. I can’t. I’m no good at it."
"It’s not that you’re no good at it," said Sergey Ivanovitch; "it is that you
don’t look at it as you should."
"Perhaps not," Levin answered dejectedly.
"Oh! do you know brother Nikolay’s turned up again?"
is brother Nikolay was the elder brother of Konstantin Levin, and halfbrother of Sergey Ivanovitch; a man uerly ruined, who had dissipated the greater
part of his fortune, was living in the strangest and lowest company, and had quarreled with his brothers.
"What did you say?" Levin cried with horror. "How do you know?"
"Prokofy saw him in the street."
"Here in Moscow? Where is he? Do you know?" Levin got up from his
chair, as though on the point of starting oﬀ at once.

xxvi
"I am sorry I told you," said Sergey Ivanovitch, shaking his head at his
younger brother’s excitement. "I sent to ﬁnd out where he is living, and sent
him his IOU to Trubin, which I paid. is is the answer he sent me."
And Sergey Ivanovitch took a note from under a paper-weight and handed
it to his brother.
Levin read in the queer, familiar handwriting: "I humbly beg you to leave
me in peace. at’s the only favor I ask of my gracious brothers.—Nikolay Levin."
Levin read it, and without raising his head stood with the note in his hands
opposite Sergey Ivanovitch.
ere was a struggle in his heart between the desire to forget his unhappy
brother for the time, and the consciousness that it would be base to do so.
"He obviously wants to oﬀend me," pursued Sergey Ivanovitch; "but he cannot oﬀend me, and I should have wished with all my heart to assist him, but I
know it’s impossible to do that."
"Yes, yes," repeated Levin. "I understand and appreciate your aitude to
him; but I shall go and see him."
"If you want to, do; but I shouldn’t advise it," said Sergey Ivanovitch. "As
regards myself, I have no fear of your doing so; he will not make you quarrel with
me; but for your own sake, I should say you would do beer not to go. You can’t
do him any good; still, do as you please."
"Very likely I can’t do any good, but I feel—especially at such a moment—but
that’s another thing—I feel I could not be at peace."
"Well, that I don’t understand," said Sergey Ivanovitch. "One thing I do understand," he added; "it’s a lesson in humility. I have come to look very diﬀerently
and more charitably on what is called infamous since brother Nikolay has become
what he is … you know what he did…"
"Oh, it’s awful, awful!" repeated Levin.
Aer obtaining his brother’s address from Sergey Ivanovitch’s footman,
Levin was on the point of seing oﬀ at once to see him, but on second thought
he decided to put oﬀ his visit till the evening. e ﬁrst thing to do to set his heart
at rest was to accomplish what he had come to Moscow for. From his brother’s
Levin went to Oblonsky’s oﬃce, and on geing news of the Shtcherbatskys from
him, he drove to the place where he had been told he might ﬁnd Kiy.

Chapter 
At four o’clock, conscious of his throbbing heart, Levin stepped out of a hired
sledge at the Zoological Gardens, and turned along the path to the frozen mounds
and the skating ground, knowing that he would certainly ﬁnd her there, as he had

xxvii
seen the Shtcherbatskys’ carriage at the entrance.
It was a bright, frosty day. Rows of carriages, sledges, drivers, and policemen were standing in the approach. Crowds of well-dressed people, with hats
bright in the sun, swarmed about the entrance and along the well-swept lile
paths between the lile houses adorned with carving in the Russian style. e
old curly birches of the gardens, all their twigs laden with snow, looked as though
freshly decked in sacred vestments.
He walked along the path towards the skating-ground, and kept saying to
himself—"You mustn’t be excited, you must be calm. What’s the maer with you?
What do you want? Be quiet, stupid," he conjured his heart. And the more he
tried to compose himself, the more breathless he found himself. An acquaintance
met him and called him by his name, but Levin did not even recognize him. He
went towards the mounds, whence came the clank of the chains of sledges as
they slipped down or were dragged up, the rumble of the sliding sledges, and the
sounds of merry voices. He walked on a few steps, and the skating-ground lay
open before his eyes, and at once, amidst all the skaters, he knew her.
He knew she was there by the rapture and the terror that seized on his heart.
She was standing talking to a lady at the opposite end of the ground. ere was
apparently nothing striking either in her dress or her aitude. But for Levin she
was as easy to ﬁnd in that crowd as a rose among neles. Everything was made
bright by her. She was the smile that shed light on all round her. "Is it possible I
can go over there on the ice, go up to her?" he thought. e place where she stood
seemed to him a holy shrine, unapproachable, and there was one moment when
he was almost retreating, so overwhelmed was he with terror. He had to make
an eﬀort to master himself, and to remind himself that people of all sorts were
moving about her, and that he too might come there to skate. He walked down,
for a long while avoiding looking at her as at the sun, but seeing her, as one does
the sun, without looking.
On that day of the week and at that time of day people of one set, all acquainted with one another, used to meet on the ice. ere were crack skaters
there, showing oﬀ their skill, and learners clinging to chairs with timid, awkward
movements, boys, and elderly people skating with hygienic motives. ey seemed
to Levin an elect band of blissful beings because they were here, near her. All the
skaters, it seemed, with perfect self-possession, skated towards her, skated by her,
even spoke to her, and were happy, quite apart from her, enjoying the capital ice
and the ﬁne weather.
Nikolay Shtcherbatsky, Kiy’s cousin, in a short jacket and tight trousers,
was siing on a garden seat with his skates on. Seeing Levin, he shouted to him:
"Ah, the ﬁrst skater in Russia! Been here long? First-rate ice—do put your
skates on."

xxviii
"I haven’t got my skates," Levin answered, marveling at this boldness and
ease in her presence, and not for one second losing sight of her, though he did
not look at her. He felt as though the sun were coming near him. She was in a
corner, and turning out her slender feet in their high boots with obvious timidity,
she skated towards him. A boy in Russian dress, desperately waving his arms
and bowed down to the ground, overtook her. She skated a lile uncertainly;
taking her hands out of the lile muﬀ that hung on a cord, she held them ready
for emergency, and looking towards Levin, whom she had recognized, she smiled
at him, and at her own fears. When she had got round the turn, she gave herself a
push oﬀ with one foot, and skated straight up to Shtcherbatsky. Clutching at his
arm, she nodded smiling to Levin. She was more splendid than he had imagined
her.
When he thought of her, he could call up a vivid picture of her to himself,
especially the charm of that lile fair head, so freely set on the shapely girlish
shoulders, and so full of childish brightness and good humor. e childishness
of her expression, together with the delicate beauty of her ﬁgure, made up her
special charm, and that he fully realized. But what always struck him in her as
something unlooked for, was the expression of her eyes, so, serene, and truthful,
and above all, her smile, which always transported Levin to an enchanted world,
where he felt himself soened and tender, as he remembered himself in some days
of his early childhood.
"Have you been here long?" she said, giving him her hand. "ank you," she
added, as he picked up the handkerchief that had fallen out of her muﬀ.
"I? I’ve not long … yesterday … I mean today … I arrived," answered Levin,
in his emotion not at once understanding her question. "I was meaning to come
and see you," he said; and then, recollecting with what intention he was trying to
see her, he was promptly overcome with confusion and blushed.
"I didn’t know you could skate, and skate so well."
She looked at him earnestly, as though wishing to make out the cause of his
confusion.
"Your praise is worth having. e tradition is kept up here that you are the
best of skaters," she said, with her lile black-gloved hand brushing a grain of
hoarfrost oﬀ her muﬀ.
"Yes, I used once to skate with passion; I wanted to reach perfection."
"You do everything with passion, I think," she said smiling. "I should so like
to see how you skate. Put on skates, and let us skate together."
"Skate together! Can that be possible?" thought Levin, gazing at her.
"I’ll put them on directly," he said.
And he went oﬀ to get skates.
"It’s a long while since we’ve seen you here, sir," said the aendant, sup-

xxix
porting his foot, and screwing on the heel of the skate. "Except you, there’s none
of the gentlemen ﬁrst-rate skaters. Will that be all right?" said he, tightening the
strap.
"Oh, yes, yes; make haste, please," answered Levin, with diﬃculty restraining the smile of rapture which would overspread his face. "Yes," he thought, "this
now is life, this is happiness! Together, she said; let us skate together! Speak to her
now? But that’s just why I’m afraid to speak—because I’m happy now, happy in
hope, anyway…. And then?…. But I must! I must! I must! Away with weakness!"
Levin rose to his feet, took oﬀ his overcoat, and scurrying over the rough
ice round the hut, came out on the smooth ice and skated without eﬀort, as it
were, by simple exercise of will, increasing and slackening speed and turning his
course. He approached with timidity, but again her smile reassured him.
She gave him her hand, and they set oﬀ side by side, going faster and faster,
and the more rapidly they moved the more tightly she grasped his hand.
"With you I should soon learn; I somehow feel conﬁdence in you," she said
to him.
"And I have conﬁdence in myself when you are leaning on me," he said,
but was at once panic-stricken at what he had said, and blushed. And indeed, no
sooner had he uered these words, when all at once, like the sun going behind
a cloud, her face lost all its friendliness, and Levin detected the familiar change
in her expression that denoted the working of thought; a crease showed on her
smooth brow.
"Is there anything troubling you?—though I’ve no right to ask such a question," he added hurriedly.
"Oh, why so?…. No, I have nothing to trouble me," she responded coldly;
and she added immediately: "You haven’t seen Mlle. Linon, have you?"
"Not yet."
"Go and speak to her, she likes you so much."
"What’s wrong? I have oﬀended her. Lord help me!" thought Levin, and he
ﬂew towards the old Frenchwoman with the gray ringlets, who was siing on a
bench. Smiling and showing her false teeth, she greeted him as an old friend.
"Yes, you see we’re growing up," she said to him, glancing towards Kiy,
"and growing old. Tiny bear has grown big now!" pursued the Frenchwoman,
laughing, and she reminded him of his joke about the three young ladies whom
he had compared to the three bears in the English nursery tale. "Do you remember
that’s what you used to call them?"
He remembered absolutely nothing, but she had been laughing at the joke
for ten years now, and was fond of it.
"Now, go and skate, go and skate. Our Kiy has learned to skate nicely,
hasn’t she?"

xxx
When Levin darted up to Kiy her face was no longer stern; her eyes looked
at him with the same sincerity and friendliness, but Levin fancied that in her
friendliness there was a certain note of deliberate composure. And he felt depressed. Aer talking a lile of her old governess and her peculiarities, she questioned him about his life.
"Surely you must be dull in the country in the winter, aren’t you?" she said.
"No, I’m not dull, I am very busy," he said, feeling that she was holding
him in check by her composed tone, which he would not have the force to break
through, just as it had been at the beginning of the winter.
"Are you going to stay in town long?" Kiy questioned him.
"I don’t know," he answered, not thinking of what he was saying. e
thought that if he were held in check by her tone of quiet friendliness he would
end by going back again without deciding anything came into his mind, and he
resolved to make a struggle against it.
"How is it you don’t know?"
"I don’t know. It depends upon you," he said, and was immediately horrorstricken at his own words.
Whether it was that she had heard his words, or that she did not want to
hear them, she made a sort of stumble, twice struck out, and hurriedly skated
away from him. She skated up to Mlle. Linon, said something to her, and went
towards the pavilion where the ladies took oﬀ their skates.
"My God! what have I done! Merciful God! help me, guide me," said Levin,
praying inwardly, and at the same time, feeling a need of violent exercise, he
skated about describing inner and outer circles.
At that moment one of the young men, the best of the skaters of the day,
came out of the coﬀee-house in his skates, with a cigaree in his mouth. Taking a
run, he dashed down the steps in his skates, crashing and bounding up and down.
He ﬂew down, and without even changing the position of his hands, skated away
over the ice.
"Ah, that’s a new trick!" said Levin, and he promptly ran up to the top to do
this new trick.
"Don’t break your neck! it needs practice!" Nikolay Shtcherbatsky shouted
aer him.
Levin went to the steps, took a run from above as best he could, and dashed
down, preserving his balance in this unwonted movement with his hands. On the
last step he stumbled, but barely touching the ice with his hand, with a violent
eﬀort recovered himself, and skated oﬀ, laughing.
"How splendid, how nice he is!" Kiy was thinking at that time, as she came
out of the pavilion with Mlle. Linon, and looked towards him with a smile of quiet
aﬀection, as though he were a favorite brother. "And can it be my fault, can I have

xxxi
done anything wrong? ey talk of ﬂirtation. I know it’s not he that I love; but
still I am happy with him, and he’s so jolly. Only, why did he say that?…" she
mused.
Catching sight of Kiy going away, and her mother meeting her at the steps,
Levin, ﬂushed from his rapid exercise, stood still and pondered a minute. He
took oﬀ his skates, and overtook the mother and daughter at the entrance of the
gardens.
"Delighted to see you," said Princess Shtcherbatskaya. "On ursdays we
are home, as always."
"Today, then?"
"We shall be pleased to see you," the princess said stiﬄy.
is stiﬀness hurt Kiy, and she could not resist the desire to smooth over
her mother’s coldness. She turned her head, and with a smile said:
"Good-bye till this evening."
At that moment Stepan Arkadyevitch, his hat cocked on one side, with
beaming face and eyes, strode into the garden like a conquering hero. But as he
approached his mother-in-law, he responded in a mournful and crestfallen tone
to her inquiries about Dolly’s health. Aer a lile subdued and dejected conversation with his mother-in-law, he threw out his chest again, and put his arm in
Levin’s.
"Well, shall we set o?" he asked. "I’ve been thinking about you all this
time, and I’m very, very glad you’ve come," he said, looking him in the face with
a signiﬁcant air.
"Yes, come along," answered Levin in ecstasy, hearing unceasingly the sound
of that voice saying, "Good-bye till this evening," and seeing the smile with which
it was said.
"To the England or the Hermitage?"
"I don’t mind which."
"All right, then, the England," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, selecting that
restaurant because he owed more there than at the Hermitage, and consequently
considered it mean to avoid it. "Have you got a sledge? at’s ﬁrst-rate, for I sent
my carriage home."
e friends hardly spoke all the way. Levin was wondering what that
change in Kiy’s expression had meant, and alternately assuring himself that
there was hope, and falling into despair, seeing clearly that his hopes were insane, and yet all the while he felt himself quite another man, uerly unlike what
he had been before her smile and those words, "Good-bye till this evening."
Stepan Arkadyevitch was absorbed during the drive in composing the menu
of the dinner.
"You like turbot, don’t you?" he said to Levin as they were arriving.

xxxii
"Eh?" responded Levin. "Turbot? Yes, I’m awfully fond of turbot."

Chapter 
When Levin went into the restaurant with Oblonsky, he could not help noticing a
certain peculiarity of expression, as it were, a restrained radiance, about the face
and whole ﬁgure of Stepan Arkadyevitch. Oblonsky took oﬀ his overcoat, and
with his hat over one ear walked into the dining room, giving directions to the
Tatar waiters, who were clustered about him in evening coats, bearing napkins.
Bowing to right and le to the people he met, and here as everywhere joyously
greeting acquaintances, he went up to the sideboard for a preliminary appetizer of
ﬁsh and vodka, and said to the painted Frenchwoman decked in ribbons, lace, and
ringlets, behind the counter, something so amusing that even that Frenchwoman
was moved to genuine laughter. Levin for his part refrained from taking any
vodka simply because he felt such a loathing of that Frenchwoman, all made up, it
seemed, of false hair, poudre de riz, and vinaigre de toilee. He made haste to move
away from her, as from a dirty place. His whole soul was ﬁlled with memories of
Kiy, and there was a smile of triumph and happiness shining in his eyes.
"is way, your excellency, please. Your excellency won’t be disturbed here,"
said a particularly pertinacious, white-headed old Tatar with immense hips and
coat-tails gaping widely behind. "Walk in, your excellency," he said to Levin; by
way of showing his respect to Stepan Arkadyevitch, being aentive to his guest
as well.
Instantly ﬂinging a fresh cloth over the round table under the bronze chandelier, though it already had a table cloth on it, he pushed up velvet chairs, and
came to a standstill before Stepan Arkadyevitch with a napkin and a bill of fare
in his hands, awaiting his commands.
"If you prefer it, your excellency, a private room will be free directly; Prince
Golistin with a lady. Fresh oysters have come in."
"Ah! oysters."
Stepan Arkadyevitch became thoughtful.
"How if we were to change our program, Levin?" he said, keeping his ﬁnger
on the bill of fare. And his face expressed serious hesitation. "Are the oysters
good? Mind now."
"ey’re Flensburg, your excellency. We’ve no Ostend."
"Flensburg will do, but are they fresh?"
"Only arrived yesterday."
"Well, then, how if we were to begin with oysters, and so change the whole
program? Eh?"

xxxiii
"It’s all the same to me. I should like cabbage soup and porridge beer than
anything; but of course there’s nothing like that here."
"Porridge à la Russe, your honor would like?" said the Tatar, bending down
to Levin, like a nurse speaking to a child.
"No, joking apart, whatever you choose is sure to be good. I’ve been skating, and I’m hungry. And don’t imagine," he added, detecting a look of dissatisfaction on Oblonsky’s face, "that I shan’t appreciate your choice. I am fond of
good things."
"I should hope so! Aer all, it’s one of the pleasures of life," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch. "Well, then, my friend, you give us two—or beer say three—dozen
oysters, clear soup with vegetables…."
"Printanière," prompted the Tatar. But Stepan Arkadyevitch apparently did
not care to allow him the satisfaction of giving the French names of the dishes.
"With vegetables in it, you know. en turbot with thick sauce, then … roast
beef; and mind it’s good. Yes, and capons, perhaps, and then sweets."
e Tatar, recollecting that it was Stepan Arkadyevitch’s way not to call
the dishes by the names in the French bill of fare, did not repeat them aer
him, but could not resist rehearsing the whole menu to himself according to the
bill:—"Soupe printanière, turbot, sauce Beaumarais, poulard à l’estragon, macédoine de fruits … etc.," and then instantly, as though worked by springs, laying
down one bound bill of fare, he took up another, the list of wines, and submied
it to Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"What shall we drink?"
"What you like, only not too much. Champagne," said Levin.
"What! to start with? You’re right though, I dare say. Do you like the white
seal?"
"Caet blanc," prompted the Tatar.
"Very well, then, give us that brand with the oysters, and then we’ll see."
"Yes, sir. And what table wine?"
"You can give us Nuits. Oh, no, beer the classic Chablis."
"Yes, sir. And your cheese, your excellency?"
"Oh, yes, Parmesan. Or would you like another?"
"No, it’s all the same to me," said Levin, unable to suppress a smile.
And the Tatar ran oﬀ with ﬂying coat-tails, and in ﬁve minutes darted in
with a dish of opened oysters on mother-of-pearl shells, and a bole between his
ﬁngers.
Stepan Arkadyevitch crushed the starchy napkin, tucked it into his waistcoat, and seling his arms comfortably, started on the oysters.
"Not bad," he said, stripping the oysters from the pearly shell with a silver
fork, and swallowing them one aer another. "Not bad," he repeated, turning his

xxxiv
dewy, brilliant eyes from Levin to the Tatar.
Levin ate the oysters indeed, though white bread and cheese would have
pleased him beer. But he was admiring Oblonsky. Even the Tatar, uncorking the
bole and pouring the sparkling wine into the delicate glasses, glanced at Stepan
Arkadyevitch, and seled his white cravat with a perceptible smile of satisfaction.
"You don’t care much for oysters, do you?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, emptying his wine glass, "or you’re worried about something. Eh?"
He wanted Levin to be in good spirits. But it was not that Levin was not
in good spirits; he was ill at ease. With what he had in his soul, he felt sore and
uncomfortable in the restaurant, in the midst of private rooms where men were
dining with ladies, in all this fuss and bustle; the surroundings of bronzes, looking
glasses, gas, and waiters—all of it was oﬀensive to him. He was afraid of sullying
what his soul was brimful of.
"I? Yes, I am; but besides, all this bothers me," he said. "You can’t conceive
how queer it all seems to a country person like me, as queer as that gentleman’s
nails I saw at your place…"
"Yes, I saw how much interested you were in poor Grinevitch’s nails," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing.
"It’s too much for me," responded Levin. "Do try, now, and put yourself in
my place, take the point of view of a country person. We in the country try to
bring our hands into such a state as will be most convenient for working with. So
we cut our nails; sometimes we turn up our sleeves. And here people purposely
let their nails grow as long as they will, and link on small saucers by way of studs,
so that they can do nothing with their hands."
Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled gaily.
"Oh, yes, that’s just a sign that he has no need to do coarse work. His work
is with the mind…"
"Maybe. But still it’s queer to me, just as at this moment it seems queer to
me that we country folks try to get our meals over as soon as we can, so as to
be ready for our work, while here are we trying to drag out our meal as long as
possible, and with that object eating oysters…"
"Why, of course," objected Stepan Arkadyevitch. "But that’s just the aim of
civilization—to make everything a source of enjoyment."
"Well, if that’s its aim, I’d rather be a savage."
"And so you are a savage. All you Levins are savages."
Levin sighed. He remembered his brother Nikolay, and felt ashamed and
sore, and he scowled; but Oblonsky began speaking of a subject which at once
drew his aention.
"Oh, I say, are you going tonight to our people, the Shtcherbatskys’, I mean?"
he said, his eyes sparkling signiﬁcantly as he pushed away the empty rough shells,

xxxv
and drew the cheese towards him.
"Yes, I shall certainly go," replied Levin; "though I fancied the princess was
not very warm in her invitation."
"What nonsense! at’s her manner…. Come, boy, the soup!…. at’s her
manner—grande dame," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "I’m coming, too, but I have to
go to the Countess Bonina’s rehearsal. Come, isn’t it true that you’re a savage?
How do you explain the sudden way in which you vanished from Moscow? e
Shtcherbatskys were continually asking me about you, as though I ought to know.
e only thing I know is that you always do what no one else does."
"Yes," said Levin, slowly and with emotion, "you’re right. I am a savage.
Only, my savageness is not in having gone away, but in coming now. Now I have
come…"
"Oh, what a lucky fellow you are!" broke in Stepan Arkadyevitch, looking
into Levin’s eyes.
"Why?"
"I know a gallant steed by tokens sure,
And by his eyes I know a youth in love,"
declaimed Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Everything is before you."
"Why, is it over for you already?"
"No; not over exactly, but the future is yours, and the present is mine, and
the present—well, it’s not all that it might be."
"How so?"
"Oh, things go wrong. But I don’t want to talk of myself, and besides I can’t
explain it all," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Well, why have you come to Moscow,
then?…. Hi! take away!" he called to the Tatar.
"You guess?" responded Levin, his eyes like deep wells of light ﬁxed on
Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"I guess, but I can’t be the ﬁrst to talk about it. You can see by that whether
I guess right or wrong," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, gazing at Levin with a subtle
smile.
"Well, and what have you to say to me?" said Levin in a quivering voice,
feeling that all the muscles of his face were quivering too. "How do you look at
the question?"
Stepan Arkadyevitch slowly emptied his glass of Chablis, never taking his
eyes oﬀ Levin.
"I?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, "there’s nothing I desire so much as
that—nothing! It would be the best thing that could be."
"But you’re not making a mistake? You know what we’re speaking o?" said

xxxvi
Levin, piercing him with his eyes. "You think it’s possible?"
"I think it’s possible. Why not possible?"
"No! do you really think it’s possible? No, tell me all you think! Oh, but if
… if refusal’s in store for me!… Indeed I feel sure…"
"Why should you think that?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling at his excitement.
"It seems so to me sometimes. at will be awful for me, and for her too."
"Oh, well, anyway there’s nothing awful in it for a girl. Every girl’s proud
of an oﬀer."
"Yes, every girl, but not she."
Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. He so well knew that feeling of Levin’s, that
for him all the girls in the world were divided into two classes: one class—all the
girls in the world except her, and those girls with all sorts of human weaknesses,
and very ordinary girls: the other class—she alone, having no weaknesses of any
sort and higher than all humanity.
"Stay, take some sauce," he said, holding back Levin’s hand as it pushed away
the sauce.
Levin obediently helped himself to sauce, but would not let Stepan Arkadyevitch go on with his dinner.
"No, stop a minute, stop a minute," he said. "You must understand that it’s
a question of life and death for me. I have never spoken to any one of this. And
there’s no one I could speak of it to, except you. You know we’re uerly unlike
each other, diﬀerent tastes and views and everything; but I know you’re fond of
me and understand me, and that’s why I like you awfully. But for God’s sake, be
quite straightforward with me."
"I tell you what I think," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling. "But I’ll say
more: my wife is a wonderful woman…" Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed, remembering his position with his wife, and, aer a moment’s silence, resumed—"She has
a gi of foreseeing things. She sees right through people; but that’s not all; she
knows what will come to pass, especially in the way of marriages. She foretold,
for instance, that Princess Shahovskaya would marry Brenteln. No one would
believe it, but it came to pass. And she’s on your side."
"How do you mean?"
"It’s not only that she likes you—she says that Kiy is certain to be your
wife."
At these words Levin’s face suddenly lighted up with a smile, a smile not
far from tears of emotion.
"She says that!" cried Levin. "I always said she was exquisite, your wife.
ere, that’s enough, enough said about it," he said, geing up from his seat.
"All right, but do sit down."

xxxvii
But Levin could not sit down. He walked with his ﬁrm tread twice up and
down the lile cage of a room, blinked his eyelids that his tears might not fall, and
only then sat down to the table.
"You must understand," said he, "it’s not love. I’ve been in love, but it’s not
that. It’s not my feeling, but a sort of force outside me has taken possession of
me. I went away, you see, because I made up my mind that it could never be, you
understand, as a happiness that does not come on earth; but I’ve struggled with
myself, I see there’s no living without it. And it must be seled."
"What did you go away for?"
"Ah, stop a minute! Ah, the thoughts that come crowding on one! e
questions one must ask oneself! Listen. You can’t imagine what you’ve done
for me by what you said. I’m so happy that I’ve become positively hateful; I’ve
forgoen everything. I heard today that my brother Nikolay … you know, he’s
here … I had even forgoen him. It seems to me that he’s happy too. It’s a sort
of madness. But one thing’s awful…. Here, you’ve been married, you know the
feeling … it’s awful that we—old—with a past … not of love, but of sins … are
brought all at once so near to a creature pure and innocent; it’s loathsome, and
that’s why one can’t help feeling oneself unworthy."
"Oh, well, you’ve not many sins on your conscience."
"Alas! all the same," said Levin, "when with loathing I go over my life, I
shudder and curse and bierly regret it…. Yes."
"What would you have? e world’s made so," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"e one comfort is like that prayer, which I always liked: ‘Forgive me not
according to my unworthiness, but according to y lovingkindness.’ at’s the
only way she can forgive me."

Chapter 
Levin emptied his glass, and they were silent for a while.
"ere’s one other thing I ought to tell you. Do you know Vronsky?" Stepan
Arkadyevitch asked Levin.
"No, I don’t. Why do you ask?"
"Give us another bole," Stepan Arkadyevitch directed the Tatar, who was
ﬁlling up their glasses and ﬁdgeting round them just when he was not wanted.
"Why you ought to know Vronsky is that he’s one of your rivals."
"Who’s Vronsky?" said Levin, and his face was suddenly transformed from
the look of childlike ecstasy which Oblonsky had just been admiring to an angry
and unpleasant expression.
"Vronsky is one of the sons of Count Kirill Ivanovitch Vronsky, and one of

xxxviii
the ﬁnest specimens of the gilded youth of Petersburg. I made his acquaintance
in Tver when I was there on oﬃcial business, and he came there for the levy of recruits. Fearfully rich, handsome, great connections, an aide-de-camp, and with all
that a very nice, good-natured fellow. But he’s more than simply a good-natured
fellow, as I’ve found out here—he’s a cultivated man, too, and very intelligent;
he’s a man who’ll make his mark."
Levin scowled and was dumb.
"Well, he turned up here soon aer you’d gone, and as I can see, he’s over
head and ears in love with Kiy, and you know that her mother…"
"Excuse me, but I know nothing," said Levin, frowning gloomily. And immediately he recollected his brother Nikolay and how hateful he was to have been
able to forget him.
"You wait a bit, wait a bit," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling and touching
his hand. "I’ve told you what I know, and I repeat that in this delicate and tender
maer, as far as one can conjecture, I believe the chances are in your favor."
Levin dropped back in his chair; his face was pale.
"But I would advise you to sele the thing as soon as may be," pursued
Oblonsky, ﬁlling up his glass.
"No, thanks, I can’t drink any more," said Levin, pushing away his glass. "I
shall be drunk…. Come, tell me how are you geing on?" he went on, obviously
anxious to change the conversation.
"One word more: in any case I advise you to sele the question soon.
Tonight I don’t advise you to speak," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Go round tomorrow morning, make an oﬀer in due form, and God bless you…"
"Oh, do you still think of coming to me for some shooting? Come next
spring, do," said Levin.
Now his whole soul was full of remorse that he had begun this conversation
with Stepan Arkadyevitch. A feeling such as his was profaned by talk of the
rivalry of some Petersburg oﬃcer, of the suppositions and the counsels of Stepan
Arkadyevitch.
Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. He knew what was passing in Levin’s soul.
"I’ll come some day," he said. "But women, my boy, they’re the pivot everything turns upon. ings are in a bad way with me, very bad. And it’s all through
women. Tell me frankly now," he pursued, picking up a cigar and keeping one
hand on his glass; "give me your advice."
"Why, what is it?"
"I’ll tell you. Suppose you’re married, you love your wife, but you’re fascinated by another woman…"
"Excuse me, but I’m absolutely unable to comprehend how … just as I can’t
comprehend how I could now, aer my dinner, go straight to a baker’s shop and

xxxix
steal a roll."
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes sparkled more than usual.
"Why not? A roll will sometimes smell so good one can’t resist it."
"Himmlisch ist’s, wenn ich bezwungen
Meine irdische Begier;
Aber doch wenn’s nich gelungen
Ha’ ich auch recht huebsch Plaisir!"
As he said this, Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled subtly. Levin, too, could not help
smiling.
"Yes, but joking apart," resumed Stepan Arkadyevitch, "you must understand
that the woman is a sweet, gentle loving creature, poor and lonely, and has sacriﬁced everything. Now, when the thing’s done, don’t you see, can one possibly
cast her o? Even supposing one parts from her, so as not to break up one’s family
life, still, can one help feeling for her, seing her on her feet, soening her lot?"
"Well, you must excuse me there. You know to me all women are divided
into two classes … at least no … truer to say: there are women and there are … I’ve
never seen exquisite fallen beings, and I never shall see them, but such creatures
as that painted Frenchwoman at the counter with the ringlets are vermin to my
mind, and all fallen women are the same."
"But the Magdalen?"
"Ah, drop that! Christ would never have said those words if He had known
how they would be abused. Of all the Gospel those words are the only ones remembered. However, I’m not saying so much what I think, as what I feel. I have
a loathing for fallen women. You’re afraid of spiders, and I of these vermin. Most
likely you’ve not made a study of spiders and don’t know their character; and so
it is with me."
"It’s very well for you to talk like that; it’s very much like that gentleman
in Dickens who used to ﬂing all diﬃcult questions over his right shoulder. But
to deny the facts is no answer. What’s to be done—you tell me that, what’s to be
done? Your wife gets older, while you’re full of life. Before you’ve time to look
round, you feel that you can’t love your wife with love, however much you may
esteem her. And then all at once love turns up, and you’re done for, done for,"
Stepan Arkadyevitch said with weary despair.
Levin half smiled.
"Yes, you’re done for," resumed Oblonsky. "But what’s to be done?"
"Don’t steal rolls."
Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed outright.
"Oh, moralist! But you must understand, there are two women; one insists

xl
only on her rights, and those rights are your love, which you can’t give her; and
the other sacriﬁces everything for you and asks for nothing. What are you to do?
How are you to act? ere’s a fearful tragedy in it."
"If you care for my profession of faith as regards that, I’ll tell you that I don’t
believe there was any tragedy about it. And this is why. To my mind, love … both
the sorts of love, which you remember Plato deﬁnes in his Banquet, served as the
test of men. Some men only understand one sort, and some only the other. And
those who only know the non-platonic love have no need to talk of tragedy. In
such love there can be no sort of tragedy. ‘I’m much obliged for the gratiﬁcation,
my humble respects’—that’s all the tragedy. And in platonic love there can be no
tragedy, because in that love all is clear and pure, because…"
At that instant Levin recollected his own sins and the inner conﬂict he had
lived through. And he added unexpectedly:
"But perhaps you are right. Very likely … I don’t know, I don’t know."
"It’s this, don’t you see," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, "you’re very much all of
a piece. at’s your strong point and your failing. You have a character that’s all
of a piece, and you want the whole of life to be of a piece too—but that’s not how
it is. You despise public oﬃcial work because you want the reality to be invariably
corresponding all the while with the aim—and that’s not how it is. You want a
man’s work, too, always to have a deﬁned aim, and love and family life always
to be undivided—and that’s not how it is. All the variety, all the charm, all the
beauty of life is made up of light and shadow."
Levin sighed and made no reply. He was thinking of his own aﬀairs, and
did not hear Oblonsky.
And suddenly both of them felt that though they were friends, though they
had been dining and drinking together, which should have drawn them closer,
yet each was thinking only of his own aﬀairs, and they had nothing to do with
one another. Oblonsky had more than once experienced this extreme sense of
aloofness, instead of intimacy, coming on aer dinner, and he knew what to do in
such cases.
"Bill!" he called, and he went into the next room where he promptly came
across an aide-de-camp of his acquaintance and dropped into conversation with
him about an actress and her protector. And at once in the conversation with the
aide-de-camp Oblonsky had a sense of relaxation and relief aer the conversation
with Levin, which always put him to too great a mental and spiritual strain.
When the Tatar appeared with a bill for twenty-six roubles and odd kopecks,
besides a tip for himself, Levin, who would another time have been horriﬁed, like
any one from the country, at his share of fourteen roubles, did not notice it, paid,
and set oﬀ homewards to dress and go to the Shtcherbatskys’ there to decide his
fate.

xli

Chapter 
e young Princess Kiy Shtcherbatskaya was eighteen. It was the ﬁrst winter
that she had been out in the world. Her success in society had been greater than
that of either of her elder sisters, and greater even than her mother had anticipated. To say nothing of the young men who danced at the Moscow balls being
almost all in love with Kiy, two serious suitors had already this ﬁrst winter made
their appearance: Levin, and immediately aer his departure, Count Vronsky.
Levin’s appearance at the beginning of the winter, his frequent visits, and
evident love for Kiy, had led to the ﬁrst serious conversations between Kiy’s
parents as to her future, and to disputes between them. e prince was on Levin’s
side; he said he wished for nothing beer for Kiy. e princess for her part, going
round the question in the manner peculiar to women, maintained that Kiy was
too young, that Levin had done nothing to prove that he had serious intentions,
that Kiy felt no great araction to him, and other side issues; but she did not
state the principal point, which was that she looked for a beer match for her
daughter, and that Levin was not to her liking, and she did not understand him.
When Levin had abruptly departed, the princess was delighted, and said to her
husband triumphantly: "You see I was right." When Vronsky appeared on the
scene, she was still more delighted, conﬁrmed in her opinion that Kiy was to
make not simply a good, but a brilliant match.
In the mother’s eyes there could be no comparison between Vronsky and
Levin. She disliked in Levin his strange and uncompromising opinions and his
shyness in society, founded, as she supposed, on his pride and his queer sort of
life, as she considered it, absorbed in cale and peasants. She did not very much
like it that he, who was in love with her daughter, had kept coming to the house
for six weeks, as though he were waiting for something, inspecting, as though
he were afraid he might be doing them too great an honor by making an oﬀer,
and did not realize that a man, who continually visits at a house where there
is a young unmarried girl, is bound to make his intentions clear. And suddenly,
without doing so, he disappeared. "It’s as well he’s not aractive enough for Kiy
to have fallen in love with him," thought the mother.
Vronsky satisﬁed all the mother’s desires. Very wealthy, clever, of aristocratic family, on the highroad to a brilliant career in the army and at court, and a
fascinating man. Nothing beer could be wished for.
Vronsky openly ﬂirted with Kiy at balls, danced with her, and came continually to the house, consequently there could be no doubt of the seriousness of
his intentions. But, in spite of that, the mother had spent the whole of that winter
in a state of terrible anxiety and agitation.
Princess Shtcherbatskaya had herself been married thirty years ago, her

xlii
aunt arranging the match. Her husband, about whom everything was well known
before hand, had come, looked at his future bride, and been looked at. e matchmaking aunt had ascertained and communicated their mutual impression. at
impression had been favorable. Aerwards, on a day ﬁxed beforehand, the expected oﬀer was made to her parents, and accepted. All had passed very simply
and easily. So it seemed, at least, to the princess. But over her own daughters
she had felt how far from simple and easy is the business, apparently so commonplace, of marrying oﬀ one’s daughters. e panics that had been lived through,
the thoughts that had been brooded over, the money that had been wasted, and
the disputes with her husband over marrying the two elder girls, Darya and Natalia! Now, since the youngest had come out, she was going through the same
terrors, the same doubts, and still more violent quarrels with her husband than
she had over the elder girls. e old prince, like all fathers indeed, was exceedingly
punctilious on the score of the honor and reputation of his daughters. He was irrationally jealous over his daughters, especially over Kiy, who was his favorite.
At every turn he had scenes with the princess for compromising her daughter.
e princess had grown accustomed to this already with her other daughters, but
now she felt that there was more ground for the prince’s touchiness. She saw that
of late years much was changed in the manners of society, that a mother’s duties
had become still more diﬃcult. She saw that girls of Kiy’s age formed some sort
of clubs, went to some sort of lectures, mixed freely in men’s society; drove about
the streets alone, many of them did not curtsey, and, what was the most important
thing, all the girls were ﬁrmly convinced that to choose their husbands was their
own aﬀair, and not their parents’. "Marriages aren’t made nowadays as they used
to be," was thought and said by all these young girls, and even by their elders.
But how marriages were made now, the princess could not learn from any one.
e French fashion—of the parents arranging their children’s future—was not accepted; it was condemned. e English fashion of the complete independence of
girls was also not accepted, and not possible in Russian society. e Russian fashion of match-making by the oﬃces of intermediate persons was for some reason
considered unseemly; it was ridiculed by every one, and by the princess herself.
But how girls were to be married, and how parents were to marry them, no one
knew. Everyone with whom the princess had chanced to discuss the maer said
the same thing: "Mercy on us, it’s high time in our day to cast oﬀ all that oldfashioned business. It’s the young people have to marry; and not their parents;
and so we ought to leave the young people to arrange it as they choose." It was
very easy for anyone to say that who had no daughters, but the princess realized
that in the process of geing to know each other, her daughter might fall in love,
and fall in love with someone who did not care to marry her or who was quite
unﬁt to be her husband. And, however much it was instilled into the princess

xliii
that in our times young people ought to arrange their lives for themselves, she
was unable to believe it, just as she would have been unable to believe that, at any
time whatever, the most suitable playthings for children ﬁve years old ought to
be loaded pistols. And so the princess was more uneasy over Kiy than she had
been over her elder sisters.
Now she was afraid that Vronsky might conﬁne himself to simply ﬂirting
with her daughter. She saw that her daughter was in love with him, but tried
to comfort herself with the thought that he was an honorable man, and would
not do this. But at the same time she knew how easy it is, with the freedom of
manners of today, to turn a girl’s head, and how lightly men generally regard
such a crime. e week before, Kiy had told her mother of a conversation she
had with Vronsky during a mazurka. is conversation had partly reassured the
princess; but perfectly at ease she could not be. Vronsky had told Kiy that both
he and his brother were so used to obeying their mother that they never made
up their minds to any important undertaking without consulting her. "And just
now, I am impatiently awaiting my mother’s arrival from Petersburg, as peculiarly
fortunate," he told her.
Kiy had repeated this without aaching any signiﬁcance to the words.
But her mother saw them in a diﬀerent light. She knew that the old lady was
expected from day to day, that she would be pleased at her son’s choice, and
she felt it strange that he should not make his oﬀer through fear of vexing his
mother. However, she was so anxious for the marriage itself, and still more for
relief from her fears, that she believed it was so. Bier as it was for the princess
to see the unhappiness of her eldest daughter, Dolly, on the point of leaving her
husband, her anxiety over the decision of her youngest daughter’s fate engrossed
all her feelings. Today, with Levin’s reappearance, a fresh source of anxiety arose.
She was afraid that her daughter, who had at one time, as she fancied, a feeling
for Levin, might, from extreme sense of honor, refuse Vronsky, and that Levin’s
arrival might generally complicate and delay the aﬀair so near being concluded.
"Why, has he been here long?" the princess asked about Levin, as they returned home.
"He came today, mamma."
"ere’s one thing I want to say…" began the princess, and from her serious
and alert face, Kiy guessed what it would be.
"Mamma," she said, ﬂushing hotly and turning quickly to her, "please, please
don’t say anything about that. I know, I know all about it."
She wished for what her mother wished for, but the motives of her mother’s
wishes wounded her.
"I only want to say that to raise hopes…"
"Mamma, darling, for goodness’ sake, don’t talk about it. It’s so horrible to

xliv
talk about it."
"I won’t," said her mother, seeing the tears in her daughter’s eyes; "but one
thing, my love; you promised me you would have no secrets from me. You won’t?"
"Never, mamma, none," answered Kiy, ﬂushing a lile, and looking her
mother straight in the face, "but there’s no use in my telling you anything, and I
… I … if I wanted to, I don’t know what to say or how … I don’t know…"
"No, she could not tell an untruth with those eyes," thought the mother,
smiling at her agitation and happiness. e princess smiled that what was taking
place just now in her soul seemed to the poor child so immense and so important.

Chapter 
Aer dinner, and till the beginning of the evening, Kiy was feeling a sensation
akin to the sensation of a young man before a bale. Her heart throbbed violently,
and her thoughts would not rest on anything.
She felt that this evening, when they would both meet for the ﬁrst time,
would be a turning point in her life. And she was continually picturing them
to herself, at one moment each separately, and then both together. When she
mused on the past, she dwelt with pleasure, with tenderness, on the memories of
her relations with Levin. e memories of childhood and of Levin’s friendship
with her dead brother gave a special poetic charm to her relations with him. His
love for her, of which she felt certain, was ﬂaering and delightful to her; and it
was pleasant for her to think of Levin. In her memories of Vronsky there always
entered a certain element of awkwardness, though he was in the highest degree
well-bred and at ease, as though there were some false note—not in Vronsky, he
was very simple and nice, but in herself, while with Levin she felt perfectly simple
and clear. But, on the other hand, directly she thought of the future with Vronsky,
there arose before her a perspective of brilliant happiness; with Levin the future
seemed misty.
When she went upstairs to dress, and looked into the looking-glass, she
noticed with joy that it was one of her good days, and that she was in complete
possession of all her forces,—she needed this so for what lay before her: she was
conscious of external composure and free grace in her movements.
At half-past seven she had only just gone down into the drawing room,
when the footman announced, "Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin." e princess was
still in her room, and the prince had not come in. "So it is to be," thought Kiy, and
all the blood seemed to rush to her heart. She was horriﬁed at her paleness, as she
glanced into the looking-glass. At that moment she knew beyond doubt that he
had come early on purpose to ﬁnd her alone and to make her an oﬀer. And only

xlv
then for the ﬁrst time the whole thing presented itself in a new, diﬀerent aspect;
only then she realized that the question did not aﬀect her only—with whom she
would be happy, and whom she loved—but that she would have that moment to
wound a man whom she liked. And to wound him cruelly. What for? Because
he, dear fellow, loved her, was in love with her. But there was no help for it, so it
must be, so it would have to be.
"My God! shall I myself really have to say it to him?" she thought. "Can I
tell him I don’t love him? at will be a lie. What am I to say to him? at I love
someone else? No, that’s impossible. I’m going away, I’m going away."
She had reached the door, when she heard his step. "No! it’s not honest.
What have I to be afraid o? I have done nothing wrong. What is to be, will be!
I’ll tell the truth. And with him one can’t be ill at ease. Here he is," she said to
herself, seeing his powerful, shy ﬁgure, with his shining eyes ﬁxed on her. She
looked straight into his face, as though imploring him to spare her, and gave her
hand.
"It’s not time yet; I think I’m too early," he said glancing round the empty
drawing room. When he saw that his expectations were realized, that there was
nothing to prevent him from speaking, his face became gloomy.
"Oh, no," said Kiy, and sat down at the table.
"But this was just what I wanted, to ﬁnd you alone," he began, not siing
down, and not looking at her, so as not to lose courage.
"Mamma will be down directly. She was very much tired…. Yesterday…"
She talked on, not knowing what her lips were uering, and not taking her
supplicating and caressing eyes oﬀ him.
He glanced at her; she blushed, and ceased speaking.
"I told you I did not know whether I should be here long … that it depended
on you…"
She dropped her head lower and lower, not knowing herself what answer
she should make to what was coming.
"at it depended on you," he repeated. "I meant to say … I meant to say … I
came for this … to be my wife!" he brought out, not knowing what he was saying;
but feeling that the most terrible thing was said, he stopped short and looked at
her…
She was breathing heavily, not looking at him. She was feeling ecstasy.
Her soul was ﬂooded with happiness. She had never anticipated that the uerance of love would produce such a powerful eﬀect on her. But it lasted only an
instant. She remembered Vronsky. She lied her clear, truthful eyes, and seeing
his desperate face, she answered hastily:
"at cannot be … forgive me."
A moment ago, and how close she had been to him, of what importance in

xlvi
his life! And how aloof and remote from him she had become now!
"It was bound to be so," he said, not looking at her.
He bowed, and was meaning to retreat.

Chapter 
But at that very moment the princess came in. ere was a look of horror on her
face when she saw them alone, and their disturbed faces. Levin bowed to her, and
said nothing. Kiy did not speak nor li her eyes. "ank God, she has refused
him," thought the mother, and her face lighted up with the habitual smile with
which she greeted her guests on ursdays. She sat down and began questioning
Levin about his life in the country. He sat down again, waiting for other visitors
to arrive, in order to retreat unnoticed.
Five minutes later there came in a friend of Kiy’s, married the preceding
winter, Countess Nordston.
She was a thin, sallow, sickly, and nervous woman, with brilliant black eyes.
She was fond of Kiy, and her aﬀection for her showed itself, as the aﬀection of
married women for girls always does, in the desire to make a match for Kiy aer
her own ideal of married happiness; she wanted her to marry Vronsky. Levin
she had oen met at the Shtcherbatskys’ early in the winter, and she had always
disliked him. Her invariable and favorite pursuit, when they met, consisted in
making fun of him.
"I do like it when he looks down at me from the height of his grandeur, or
breaks oﬀ his learned conversation with me because I’m a fool, or is condescending to me. I like that so; to see him condescending! I am so glad he can’t bear me,"
she used to say of him.
She was right, for Levin actually could not bear her, and despised her for
what she was proud of and regarded as a ﬁne characteristic—her nervousness, her
delicate contempt and indiﬀerence for everything coarse and earthly.
e Countess Nordston and Levin got into that relation with one another
not seldom seen in society, when two persons, who remain externally on friendly
terms, despise each other to such a degree that they cannot even take each other
seriously, and cannot even be oﬀended by each other.
e Countess Nordston pounced upon Levin at once.
"Ah, Konstantin Dmitrievitch! So you’ve come back to our corrupt Babylon,"
she said, giving him her tiny, yellow hand, and recalling what he had chanced to
say early in the winter, that Moscow was a Babylon. "Come, is Babylon reformed,
or have you degenerated?" she added, glancing with a simper at Kiy.
"It’s very ﬂaering for me, countess, that you remember my words so well,"

xlvii
responded Levin, who had succeeded in recovering his composure, and at once
from habit dropped into his tone of joking hostility to the Countess Nordston.
"ey must certainly make a great impression on you."
"Oh, I should think so! I always note them all down. Well, Kiy, have you
been skating again?…"
And she began talking to Kiy. Awkward as it was for Levin to withdraw
now, it would still have been easier for him to perpetrate this awkwardness than
to remain all the evening and see Kiy, who glanced at him now and then and
avoided his eyes. He was on the point of geing up, when the princess, noticing
that he was silent, addressed him.
"Shall you be long in Moscow? You’re busy with the district council, though,
aren’t you, and can’t be away for long?"
"No, princess, I’m no longer a member of the council," he said. "I have come
up for a few days."
"ere’s something the maer with him," thought Countess Nordston,
glancing at his stern, serious face. "He isn’t in his old argumentative mood. But
I’ll draw him out. I do love making a fool of him before Kiy, and I’ll do it."
"Konstantin Dmitrievitch," she said to him, "do explain to me, please, what’s
the meaning of it. You know all about such things. At home in our village of
Kaluga all the peasants and all the women have drunk up all they possessed, and
now they can’t pay us any rent. What’s the meaning of that? You always praise
the peasants so."
At that instant another lady came into the room, and Levin got up.
"Excuse me, countess, but I really know nothing about it, and can’t tell you
anything," he said, and looked round at the oﬃcer who came in behind the lady.
"at must be Vronsky," thought Levin, and, to be sure of it, glanced at Kiy.
She had already had time to look at Vronsky, and looked round at Levin. And
simply from the look in her eyes, that grew unconsciously brighter, Levin knew
that she loved that man, knew it as surely as if she had told him so in words. But
what sort of a man was he? Now, whether for good or for ill, Levin could not
choose but remain; he must ﬁnd out what the man was like whom she loved.
ere are people who, on meeting a successful rival, no maer in what, are
at once disposed to turn their backs on everything good in him, and to see only
what is bad. ere are people, on the other hand, who desire above all to ﬁnd in
that lucky rival the qualities by which he has outstripped them, and seek with a
throbbing ache at heart only what is good. Levin belonged to the second class.
But he had no diﬃculty in ﬁnding what was good and aractive in Vronsky. It
was apparent at the ﬁrst glance. Vronsky was a squarely built, dark man, not
very tall, with a good-humored, handsome, and exceedingly calm and resolute
face. Everything about his face and ﬁgure, from his short-cropped black hair and

xlviii
freshly shaven chin down to his loosely ﬁing, brand-new uniform, was simple
and at the same time elegant. Making way for the lady who had come in, Vronsky
went up to the princess and then to Kiy.
As he approached her, his beautiful eyes shone with a specially tender light,
and with a faint, happy, and modestly triumphant smile (so it seemed to Levin),
bowing carefully and respectfully over her, he held out his small broad hand to
her.
Greeting and saying a few words to everyone, he sat down without once
glancing at Levin, who had never taken his eyes oﬀ him.
"Let me introduce you," said the princess, indicating Levin. "Konstantin
Dmitrievitch Levin, Count Alexey Kirillovitch Vronsky."
Vronsky got up and, looking cordially at Levin, shook hands with him.
"I believe I was to have dined with you this winter," he said, smiling his
simple and open smile; "but you had unexpectedly le for the country."
"Konstantin Dmitrievitch despises and hates town and us townspeople," said
Countess Nordston.
"My words must make a deep impression on you, since you remember them
so well," said Levin, and, suddenly conscious that he had said just the same thing
before, he reddened.
Vronsky looked at Levin and Countess Nordston, and smiled.
"Are you always in the country?" he inquired. "I should think it must be dull
in the winter."
"It’s not dull if one has work to do; besides, one’s not dull by oneself," Levin
replied abruptly.
"I am fond of the country," said Vronsky, noticing, and aﬀecting not to notice,
Levin’s tone.
"But I hope, count, you would not consent to live in the country always,"
said Countess Nordston.
"I don’t know; I have never tried for long. I experienced a queer feeling
once," he went on. "I never longed so for the country, Russian country, with bast
shoes and peasants, as when I was spending a winter with my mother in Nice.
Nice itself is dull enough, you know. And indeed, Naples and Sorrento are only
pleasant for a short time. And it’s just there that Russia comes back to me most
vividly, and especially the country. It’s as though…"
He talked on, addressing both Kiy and Levin, turning his serene, friendly
eyes from one to the other, and saying obviously just what came into his head.
Noticing that Countess Nordston wanted to say something, he stopped
short without ﬁnishing what he had begun, and listened aentively to her.
e conversation did not ﬂag for an instant, so that the princess, who always kept in reserve, in case a subject should be lacking, two heavy guns—the

xlix
relative advantages of classical and of modern education, and universal military
service—had not to move out either of them, while Countess Nordston had not a
chance of chaﬃng Levin.
Levin wanted to, and could not, take part in the general conversation; saying to himself every instant, "Now go," he still did not go, as though waiting for
something.
e conversation fell upon table-turning and spirits, and Countess Nordston, who believed in spiritualism, began to describe the marvels she had seen.
"Ah, countess, you really must take me, for pity’s sake do take me to see
them! I have never seen anything extraordinary, though I am always on the lookout for it everywhere," said Vronsky, smiling.
"Very well, next Saturday," answered Countess Nordston. "But you, Konstantin Dmitrievitch, do you believe in it?" she asked Levin.
"Why do you ask me? You know what I shall say."
"But I want to hear your opinion."
"My opinion," answered Levin, "is only that this table-turning simply proves
that educated society—so called—is no higher than the peasants. ey believe in
the evil eye, and in witchcra and omens, while we…"
"Oh, then you don’t believe in it?"
"I can’t believe in it, countess."
"But if I’ve seen it mysel?"
"e peasant women too tell us they have seen goblins."
"en you think I tell a lie?"
And she laughed a mirthless laugh.
"Oh, no, Masha, Konstantin Dmitrievitch said he could not believe in it," said
Kiy, blushing for Levin, and Levin saw this, and, still more exasperated, would
have answered, but Vronsky with his bright frank smile rushed to the support of
the conversation, which was threatening to become disagreeable.
"You do not admit the conceivability at all?" he queried. "But why not? We
admit the existence of electricity, of which we know nothing. Why should there
not be some new force, still unknown to us, which…"
"When electricity was discovered," Levin interrupted hurriedly, "it was only
the phenomenon that was discovered, and it was unknown from what it proceeded
and what were its eﬀects, and ages passed before its applications were conceived.
But the spiritualists have begun with tables writing for them, and spirits appearing
to them, and have only later started saying that it is an unknown force."
Vronsky listened aentively to Levin, as he always did listen, obviously
interested in his words.
"Yes, but the spiritualists say we don’t know at present what this force is,
but there is a force, and these are the conditions in which it acts. Let the scientiﬁc

l
men ﬁnd out what the force consists in. No, I don’t see why there should not be
a new force, if it…"
"Why, because with electricity," Levin interrupted again, "every time you
rub tar against wool, a recognized phenomenon is manifested, but in this case it
does not happen every time, and so it follows it is not a natural phenomenon."
Feeling probably that the conversation was taking a tone too serious for a
drawing room, Vronsky made no rejoinder, but by way of trying to change the
conversation, he smiled brightly, and turned to the ladies.
"Do let us try at once, countess," he said; but Levin would ﬁnish saying what
he thought.
"I think," he went on, "that this aempt of the spiritualists to explain their
marvels as some sort of new natural force is most futile. ey boldly talk of spiritual force, and then try to subject it to material experiment."
Every one was waiting for him to ﬁnish, and he felt it.
"And I think you would be a ﬁrst-rate medium," said Countess Nordston;
"there’s something enthusiastic in you."
Levin opened his mouth, was about to say something, reddened, and said
nothing.
"Do let us try table-turning at once, please," said Vronsky. "Princess, will
you allow it?"
And Vronsky stood up, looking for a lile table.
Kiy got up to fetch a table, and as she passed, her eyes met Levin’s. She felt
for him with her whole heart, the more because she was pitying him for suﬀering
of which she was herself the cause. "If you can forgive me, forgive me," said her
eyes, "I am so happy."
"I hate them all, and you, and myself," his eyes responded, and he took up
his hat. But he was not destined to escape. Just as they were arranging themselves
round the table, and Levin was on the point of retiring, the old prince came in,
and aer greeting the ladies, addressed Levin.
"Ah!" he began joyously. "Been here long, my boy? I didn’t even know you
were in town. Very glad to see you." e old prince embraced Levin, and talking
to him did not observe Vronsky, who had risen, and was serenely waiting till the
prince should turn to him.
Kiy felt how distasteful her father’s warmth was to Levin aer what had
happened. She saw, too, how coldly her father responded at last to Vronsky’s
bow, and how Vronsky looked with amiable perplexity at her father, as though
trying and failing to understand how and why anyone could be hostilely disposed
towards him, and she ﬂushed.
"Prince, let us have Konstantin Dmitrievitch," said Countess Nordston; "we
want to try an experiment."

li
"What experiment? Table-turning? Well, you must excuse me, ladies and
gentlemen, but to my mind it is beer fun to play the ring game," said the old
prince, looking at Vronsky, and guessing that it had been his suggestion. "ere’s
some sense in that, anyway."
Vronsky looked wonderingly at the prince with his resolute eyes, and, with
a faint smile, began immediately talking to Countess Nordston of the great ball
that was to come oﬀ next week.
"I hope you will be there?" he said to Kiy. As soon as the old prince turned
away from him, Levin went out unnoticed, and the last impression he carried
away with him of that evening was the smiling, happy face of Kiy answering
Vronsky’s inquiry about the ball.

Chapter 
At the end of the evening Kiy told her mother of her conversation with Levin,
and in spite of all the pity she felt for Levin, she was glad at the thought that she
had received an oﬀer. She had no doubt that she had acted rightly. But aer she
had gone to bed, for a long while she could not sleep. One impression pursued
her relentlessly. It was Levin’s face, with his scowling brows, and his kind eyes
looking out in dark dejection below them, as he stood listening to her father, and
glancing at her and at Vronsky. And she felt so sorry for him that tears came into
her eyes. But immediately she thought of the man for whom she had given him
up. She vividly recalled his manly, resolute face, his noble self-possession, and
the good nature conspicuous in everything towards everyone. She remembered
the love for her of the man she loved, and once more all was gladness in her
soul, and she lay on the pillow, smiling with happiness. "I’m sorry, I’m sorry; but
what could I do? It’s not my fault," she said to herself; but an inner voice told
her something else. Whether she felt remorse at having won Levin’s love, or at
having refused him, she did not know. But her happiness was poisoned by doubts.
"Lord, have pity on us; Lord, have pity on us; Lord, have pity on us!" she repeated
to herself, till she fell asleep.
Meanwhile there took place below, in the prince’s lile library, one of the
scenes so oen repeated between the parents on account of their favorite daughter.
"What? I’ll tell you what!" shouted the prince, waving his arms, and at
once wrapping his squirrel-lined dressing-gown round him again. "at you’ve
no pride, no dignity; that you’re disgracing, ruining your daughter by this vulgar,
stupid match-making!"
"But, really, for mercy’s sake, prince, what have I done?" said the princess,

lii
almost crying.
She, pleased and happy aer her conversation with her daughter, had gone
to the prince to say good-night as usual, and though she had no intention of telling
him of Levin’s oﬀer and Kiy’s refusal, still she hinted to her husband that she
fancied things were practically seled with Vronsky, and that he would declare
himself so soon as his mother arrived. And thereupon, at those words, the prince
had all at once ﬂown into a passion, and began to use unseemly language.
"What have you done? I’ll tell you what. First of all, you’re trying to catch
an eligible gentleman, and all Moscow will be talking of it, and with good reason.
If you have evening parties, invite everyone, don’t pick out the possible suitors.
Invite all the young bucks. Engage a piano player, and let them dance, and not
as you do things nowadays, hunting up good matches. It makes me sick, sick to
see it, and you’ve gone on till you’ve turned the poor wench’s head. Levin’s a
thousand times the beer man. As for this lile Petersburg swell, they’re turned
out by machinery, all on one paern, and all precious rubbish. But if he were a
prince of the blood, my daughter need not run aer anyone."
"But what have I done?"
"Why, you’ve…" e prince was crying wrathfully.
"I know if one were to listen to you," interrupted the princess, "we should
never marry our daughter. If it’s to be so, we’d beer go into the country."
"Well, and we had beer."
"But do wait a minute. Do I try and catch them? I don’t try to catch them
in the least. A young man, and a very nice one, has fallen in love with her, and
she, I fancy…"
"Oh, yes, you fancy! And how if she really is in love, and he’s no more
thinking of marriage than I am!… Oh, that I should live to see it! Ah! spiritualism!
Ah! Nice! Ah! the ball!" And the prince, imagining that he was mimicking his
wife, made a mincing curtsey at each word. "And this is how we’re preparing
wretchedness for Kiy; and she’s really got the notion into her head…"
"But what makes you suppose so?"
"I don’t suppose; I know. We have eyes for such things, though women-folk
haven’t. I see a man who has serious intentions, that’s Levin: and I see a peacock,
like this feather-head, who’s only amusing himself."
"Oh, well, when once you get an idea into your head!…"
"Well, you’ll remember my words, but too late, just as with Dolly."
"Well, well, we won’t talk of it," the princess stopped him, recollecting her
unlucky Dolly.
"By all means, and good night!"
And signing each other with the cross, the husband and wife parted with a
kiss, feeling that they each remained of their own opinion.

liii
e princess had at ﬁrst been quite certain that that evening had seled
Kiy’s future, and that there could be no doubt of Vronsky’s intentions, but her
husband’s words had disturbed her. And returning to her own room, in terror
before the unknown future, she, too, like Kiy, repeated several times in her heart,
"Lord, have pity; Lord, have pity; Lord, have pity."

Chapter 
Vronsky had never had a real home life. His mother had been in her youth a
brilliant society woman, who had had during her married life, and still more afterwards, many love aﬀairs notorious in the whole fashionable world. His father
he scarcely remembered, and he had been educated in the Corps of Pages.
Leaving the school very young as a brilliant oﬃcer, he had at once got into
the circle of wealthy Petersburg army men. Although he did go more or less into
Petersburg society, his love aﬀairs had always hitherto been outside it.
In Moscow he had for the ﬁrst time felt, aer his luxurious and coarse life
at Petersburg, all the charm of intimacy with a sweet and innocent girl of his
own rank, who cared for him. It never even entered his head that there could be
any harm in his relations with Kiy. At balls he danced principally with her. He
was a constant visitor at their house. He talked to her as people commonly do
talk in society—all sorts of nonsense, but nonsense to which he could not help
aaching a special meaning in her case. Although he said nothing to her that he
could not have said before everybody, he felt that she was becoming more and
more dependent upon him, and the more he felt this, the beer he liked it, and
the tenderer was his feeling for her. He did not know that his mode of behavior
in relation to Kiy had a deﬁnite character, that it is courting young girls with no
intention of marriage, and that such courting is one of the evil actions common
among brilliant young men such as he was. It seemed to him that he was the ﬁrst
who had discovered this pleasure, and he was enjoying his discovery.
If he could have heard what her parents were saying that evening, if he
could have put himself at the point of view of the family and have heard that
Kiy would be unhappy if he did not marry her, he would have been greatly
astonished, and would not have believed it. He could not believe that what gave
such great and delicate pleasure to him, and above all to her, could be wrong. Still
less could he have believed that he ought to marry.
Marriage had never presented itself to him as a possibility. He not only
disliked family life, but a family, and especially a husband was, in accordance with
the views general in the bachelor world in which he lived, conceived as something
alien, repellant, and, above all, ridiculous.

liv
But though Vronsky had not the least suspicion what the parents were saying, he felt on coming away from the Shtcherbatskys’ that the secret spiritual bond
which existed between him and Kiy had grown so much stronger that evening
that some step must be taken. But what step could and ought to be taken he could
not imagine.
"What is so exquisite," he thought, as he returned from the Shtcherbatskys’,
carrying away with him, as he always did, a delicious feeling of purity and freshness, arising partly from the fact that he had not been smoking for a whole
evening, and with it a new feeling of tenderness at her love for him—"what is
so exquisite is that not a word has been said by me or by her, but we understand
each other so well in this unseen language of looks and tones, that this evening
more clearly than ever she told me she loves me. And how secretly, simply, and
most of all, how trustfully! I feel myself beer, purer. I feel that I have a heart,
and that there is a great deal of good in me. ose sweet, loving eyes! When she
said: ‘Indeed I do…’
"Well, what then? Oh, nothing. It’s good for me, and good for her." And he
began wondering where to ﬁnish the evening.
He passed in review of the places he might go to. "Club? a game of bezique, champagne with Ignatov? No, I’m not going. Château des Fleurs; there I
shall ﬁnd Oblonsky, songs, the cancan. No, I’m sick of it. at’s why I like the
Shtcherbatskys’, that I’m growing beer. I’ll go home." He went straight to his
room at Dussot’s Hotel, ordered supper, and then undressed, and as soon as his
head touched the pillow, fell into a sound sleep.

Chapter 
Next day at eleven o’clock in the morning Vronsky drove to the station of the
Petersburg railway to meet his mother, and the ﬁrst person he came across on the
great ﬂight of steps was Oblonsky, who was expecting his sister by the same train.
"Ah! your excellency!" cried Oblonsky, "whom are you meeting?"
"My mother," Vronsky responded, smiling, as everyone did who met Oblonsky. He shook hands with him, and together they ascended the steps. "She is to
be here from Petersburg today."
"I was looking out for you till two o’clock last night. Where did you go aer
the Shtcherbatskys’?"
"Home," answered Vronsky. "I must own I felt so well content yesterday
aer the Shtcherbatskys’ that I didn’t care to go anywhere."
"I know a gallant steed by tokens sure,

lv
And by his eyes I know a youth in love,"
declaimed Stepan Arkadyevitch, just as he had done before to Levin.
Vronsky smiled with a look that seemed to say that he did not deny it, but
he promptly changed the subject.
"And whom are you meeting?" he asked.
"I? I’ve come to meet a prey woman," said Oblonsky.
"You don’t say so!"
"Honi soit qui mal y pense! My sister Anna."
"Ah! that’s Madame Karenina," said Vronsky.
"You know her, no doubt?"
"I think I do. Or perhaps not … I really am not sure," Vronsky answered
heedlessly, with a vague recollection of something stiﬀ and tedious evoked by the
name Karenina.
"But Alexey Alexandrovitch, my celebrated brother-in-law, you surely must
know. All the world knows him."
"I know him by reputation and by sight. I know that he’s clever, learned,
religious somewhat…. But you know that’s not … not in my line," said Vronsky in
English.
"Yes, he’s a very remarkable man; rather a conservative, but a splendid man,"
observed Stepan Arkadyevitch, "a splendid man."
"Oh, well, so much the beer for him," said Vronsky smiling. "Oh, you’ve
come," he said, addressing a tall old footman of his mother’s, standing at the door;
"come here."
Besides the charm Oblonsky had in general for everyone, Vronsky had felt
of late specially drawn to him by the fact that in his imagination he was associated
with Kiy.
"Well, what do you say? Shall we give a supper on Sunday for the diva?" he
said to him with a smile, taking his arm.
"Of course. I’m collecting subscriptions. Oh, did you make the acquaintance
of my friend Levin?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Yes; but he le rather early."
"He’s a capital fellow," pursued Oblonsky. "Isn’t he?"
"I don’t know why it is," responded Vronsky, "in all Moscow people—present
company of course excepted," he put in jestingly, "there’s something uncompromising. ey are all on the defensive, lose their tempers, as though they all want
to make one feel something…"
"Yes, that’s true, it is so," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing goodhumoredly.
"Will the train soon be in?" Vronsky asked a railway oﬃcial.

lvi
"e train’s signaled," answered the man.
e approach of the train was more and more evident by the preparatory
bustle in the station, the rush of porters, the movement of policemen and aendants, and people meeting the train. rough the frosty vapor could be seen workmen in short sheepskins and so felt boots crossing the rails of the curving line.
e hiss of the boiler could be heard on the distant rails, and the rumble of something heavy.
"No," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who felt a great inclination to tell Vronsky
of Levin’s intentions in regard to Kiy. "No, you’ve not got a true impression
of Levin. He’s a very nervous man, and is sometimes out of humor, it’s true,
but then he is oen very nice. He’s such a true, honest nature, and a heart of
gold. But yesterday there were special reasons," pursued Stepan Arkadyevitch,
with a meaning smile, totally oblivious of the genuine sympathy he had felt the
day before for his friend, and feeling the same sympathy now, only for Vronsky.
"Yes, there were reasons why he could not help being either particularly happy
or particularly unhappy."
Vronsky stood still and asked directly: "How so? Do you mean he made
your belle-soeur an oﬀer yesterday?"
"Maybe," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "I fancied something of the sort yesterday. Yes, if he went away early, and was out of humor too, it must mean it…. He’s
been so long in love, and I’m very sorry for him."
"So that’s it! I should imagine, though, she might reckon on a beer match,"
said Vronsky, drawing himself up and walking about again, "though I don’t know
him, of course," he added. "Yes, that is a hateful position! at’s why most fellows
prefer to have to do with Klaras. If you don’t succeed with them it only proves
that you’ve not enough cash, but in this case one’s dignity’s at stake. But here’s
the train."
e engine had already whistled in the distance. A few instants later the
platform was quivering, and with puﬀs of steam hanging low in the air from the
frost, the engine rolled up, with the lever of the middle wheel rhythmically moving up and down, and the stooping ﬁgure of the engine-driver covered with frost.
Behind the tender, seing the platform more and more slowly swaying, came the
luggage van with a dog whining in it. At last the passenger carriages rolled in,
oscillating before coming to a standstill.
A smart guard jumped out, giving a whistle, and aer him one by one the
impatient passengers began to get down: an oﬃcer of the guards, holding himself
erect, and looking severely about him; a nimble lile merchant with a satchel,
smiling gaily; a peasant with a sack over his shoulder.
Vronsky, standing beside Oblonsky, watched the carriages and the passengers, totally oblivious of his mother. What he had just heard about Kiy excited

lvii
and delighted him. Unconsciously he arched his chest, and his eyes ﬂashed. He
felt himself a conqueror.
"Countess Vronskaya is in that compartment," said the smart guard, going
up to Vronsky.
e guard’s words roused him, and forced him to think of his mother and
his approaching meeting with her. He did not in his heart respect his mother,
and without acknowledging it to himself, he did not love her, though in accordance with the ideas of the set in which he lived, and with his own education,
he could not have conceived of any behavior to his mother not in the highest degree respectful and obedient, and the more externally obedient and respectful his
behavior, the less in his heart he respected and loved her.

Chapter 
Vronsky followed the guard to the carriage, and at the door of the compartment
he stopped short to make room for a lady who was geing out.
With the insight of a man of the world, from one glance at this lady’s appearance Vronsky classiﬁed her as belonging to the best society. He begged pardon, and was geing into the carriage, but felt he must glance at her once more;
not that she was very beautiful, not on account of the elegance and modest grace
which were apparent in her whole ﬁgure, but because in the expression of her
charming face, as she passed close by him, there was something peculiarly caressing and so. As he looked round, she too turned her head. Her shining gray
eyes, that looked dark from the thick lashes, rested with friendly aention on his
face, as though she were recognizing him, and then promptly turned away to the
passing crowd, as though seeking someone. In that brief look Vronsky had time to
notice the suppressed eagerness which played over her face, and ﬂied between
the brilliant eyes and the faint smile that curved her red lips. It was as though her
nature were so brimming over with something that against her will it showed itself now in the ﬂash of her eyes, and now in her smile. Deliberately she shrouded
the light in her eyes, but it shone against her will in the faintly perceptible smile.
Vronsky stepped into the carriage. His mother, a dried-up old lady with
black eyes and ringlets, screwed up her eyes, scanning her son, and smiled slightly
with her thin lips. Geing up from the seat and handing her maid a bag, she gave
her lile wrinkled hand to her son to kiss, and liing his head from her hand,
kissed him on the cheek.
"You got my telegram? ite well? ank God."
"You had a good journey?" said her son, siing down beside her, and involuntarily listening to a woman’s voice outside the door. He knew it was the voice

lviii
of the lady he had met at the door.
"All the same I don’t agree with you," said the lady’s voice.
"It’s the Petersburg view, madame."
"Not Petersburg, but simply feminine," she responded.
"Well, well, allow me to kiss your hand."
"Good-bye, Ivan Petrovitch. And could you see if my brother is here, and
send him to me?" said the lady in the doorway, and stepped back again into the
compartment.
"Well, have you found your brother?" said Countess Vronskaya, addressing
the lady.
Vronsky understood now that this was Madame Karenina.
"Your brother is here," he said, standing up. "Excuse me, I did not know you,
and, indeed, our acquaintance was so slight," said Vronsky, bowing, "that no doubt
you do not remember me."
"Oh, no," said she, "I should have known you because your mother and I
have been talking, I think, of nothing but you all the way." As she spoke she let
the eagerness that would insist on coming out show itself in her smile. "And still
no sign of my brother."
"Do call him, Alexey," said the old countess. Vronsky stepped out onto the
platform and shouted:
"Oblonsky! Here!"
Madame Karenina, however, did not wait for her brother, but catching sight
of him she stepped out with her light, resolute step. And as soon as her brother
had reached her, with a gesture that struck Vronsky by its decision and its grace,
she ﬂung her le arm around his neck, drew him rapidly to her, and kissed him
warmly. Vronsky gazed, never taking his eyes from her, and smiled, he could not
have said why. But recollecting that his mother was waiting for him, he went
back again into the carriage.
"She’s very sweet, isn’t she?" said the countess of Madame Karenina. "Her
husband put her with me, and I was delighted to have her. We’ve been talking all
the way. And so you, I hear … vous ﬁlez le parfait amour. Tant mieux, mon er,
tant mieux."
"I don’t know what you are referring to, maman," he answered coldly.
"Come, maman, let us go."
Madame Karenina entered the carriage again to say good-bye to the countess.
"Well, countess, you have met your son, and I my brother," she said. "And
all my gossip is exhausted. I should have nothing more to tell you."
"Oh, no," said the countess, taking her hand. "I could go all around the world
with you and never be dull. You are one of those delightful women in whose

lix
company it’s sweet to be silent as well as to talk. Now please don’t fret over your
son; you can’t expect never to be parted."
Madame Karenina stood quite still, holding herself very erect, and her eyes
were smiling.
"Anna Arkadyevna," the countess said in explanation to her son, "has a lile
son eight years old, I believe, and she has never been parted from him before, and
she keeps freing over leaving him."
"Yes, the countess and I have been talking all the time, I of my son and she
of hers," said Madame Karenina, and again a smile lighted up her face, a caressing
smile intended for him.
"I am afraid that you must have been dreadfully bored," he said, promptly
catching the ball of coquetry she had ﬂung him. But apparently she did not care
to pursue the conversation in that strain, and she turned to the old countess.
"ank you so much. e time has passed so quickly. Good-bye, countess."
"Good-bye, my love," answered the countess. "Let me have a kiss of your
prey face. I speak plainly, at my age, and I tell you simply that I’ve lost my heart
to you."
Stereotyped as the phrase was, Madame Karenina obviously believed it and
was delighted by it. She ﬂushed, bent down slightly, and put her cheek to the
countess’s lips, drew herself up again, and with the same smile ﬂuering between
her lips and her eyes, she gave her hand to Vronsky. He pressed the lile hand
she gave him, and was delighted, as though at something special, by the energetic
squeeze with which she freely and vigorously shook his hand. She went out with
the rapid step which bore her rather fully-developed ﬁgure with such strange
lightness.
"Very charming," said the countess.
at was just what her son was thinking. His eyes followed her till her
graceful ﬁgure was out of sight, and then the smile remained on his face. He saw
out of the window how she went up to her brother, put her arm in his, and began
telling him something eagerly, obviously something that had nothing to do with
him, Vronsky, and at that he felt annoyed.
"Well, maman, are you perfectly well?" he repeated, turning to his mother.
"Everything has been delightful. Alexander has been very good, and Marie
has grown very prey. She’s very interesting."
And she began telling him again of what interested her most—the christening of her grandson, for which she had been staying in Petersburg, and the special
favor shown her elder son by the Tsar.
"Here’s Lavrenty," said Vronsky, looking out of the window; "now we can
go, if you like."
e old butler who had traveled with the countess, came to the carriage to

lx
announce that everything was ready, and the countess got up to go.
"Come; there’s not such a crowd now," said Vronsky.
e maid took a handbag and the lap dog, the butler and a porter the other
baggage. Vronsky gave his mother his arm; but just as they were geing out of
the carriage several men ran suddenly by with panic-stricken faces. e stationmaster, too, ran by in his extraordinary colored cap. Obviously something unusual
had happened. e crowd who had le the train were running back again.
"What?… What?… Where?… Flung himself!… Crushed!…" was heard
among the crowd. Stepan Arkadyevitch, with his sister on his arm, turned back.
ey too looked scared, and stopped at the carriage door to avoid the crowd.
e ladies got in, while Vronsky and Stepan Arkadyevitch followed the
crowd to ﬁnd out details of the disaster.
A guard, either drunk or too much muﬄed up in the bier frost, had not
heard the train moving back, and had been crushed.
Before Vronsky and Oblonsky came back the ladies heard the facts from the
butler.
Oblonsky and Vronsky had both seen the mutilated corpse. Oblonsky was
evidently upset. He frowned and seemed ready to cry.
"Ah, how awful! Ah, Anna, if you had seen it! Ah, how awful!" he said.
Vronsky did not speak; his handsome face was serious, but perfectly composed.
"Oh, if you had seen it, countess," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "And his wife
was there…. It was awful to see her!…. She ﬂung herself on the body. ey say
he was the only support of an immense family. How awful!"
"Couldn’t one do anything for her?" said Madame Karenina in an agitated
whisper.
Vronsky glanced at her, and immediately got out of the carriage.
"I’ll be back directly, maman," he remarked, turning round in the doorway.
When he came back a few minutes later, Stepan Arkadyevitch was already
in conversation with the countess about the new singer, while the countess was
impatiently looking towards the door, waiting for her son.
"Now let us be oﬀ," said Vronsky, coming in. ey went out together. Vronsky was in front with his mother. Behind walked Madame Karenina with her
brother. Just as they were going out of the station the station-master overtook
Vronsky.
"You gave my assistant two hundred roubles. Would you kindly explain for
whose beneﬁt you intend them?"
"For the widow," said Vronsky, shrugging his shoulders. "I should have
thought there was no need to ask."
"You gave that?" cried Oblonsky, behind, and, pressing his sister’s hand, he

lxi
added: "Very nice, very nice! Isn’t he a splendid fellow? Good-bye, countess."
And he and his sister stood still, looking for her maid.
When they went out the Vronsky’s carriage had already driven away. People coming in were still talking of what happened.
"What a horrible death!" said a gentleman, passing by. "ey say he was cut
in two pieces."
"On the contrary, I think it’s the easiest—instantaneous," observed another.
"How is it they don’t take proper precautions?" said a third.
Madame Karenina seated herself in the carriage, and Stepan Arkadyevitch
saw with surprise that her lips were quivering, and she was with diﬃculty restraining her tears.
"What is it, Anna?" he asked, when they had driven a few hundred yards.
"It’s an omen of evil," she said.
"What nonsense!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "You’ve come, that’s the chief
thing. You can’t conceive how I’m resting my hopes on you."
"Have you known Vronsky long?" she asked.
"Yes. You know we’re hoping he will marry Kiy."
"Yes?" said Anna soly. "Come now, let us talk of you," she added, tossing her head, as though she would physically shake oﬀ something superﬂuous
oppressing her. "Let us talk of your aﬀairs. I got your leer, and here I am."
"Yes, all my hopes are in you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Well, tell me all about it."
And Stepan Arkadyevitch began to tell his story.
On reaching home Oblonsky helped his sister out, sighed, pressed her hand,
and set oﬀ to his oﬃce.

Chapter 
When Anna went into the room, Dolly was siing in the lile drawing-room with
a white-headed fat lile boy, already like his father, giving him a lesson in French
reading. As the boy read, he kept twisting and trying to tear oﬀ a buon that was
nearly oﬀ his jacket. His mother had several times taken his hand from it, but the
fat lile hand went back to the buon again. His mother pulled the buon oﬀ and
put it in her pocket.
"Keep your hands still, Grisha," she said, and she took up her work, a coverlet
she had long been making. She always set to work on it at depressed moments, and
now she knied at it nervously, twitching her ﬁngers and counting the stitches.
ough she had sent word the day before to her husband that it was nothing to
her whether his sister came or not, she had made everything ready for her arrival,

lxii
and was expecting her sister-in-law with emotion.
Dolly was crushed by her sorrow, uerly swallowed up by it. Still she did
not forget that Anna, her sister-in-law, was the wife of one of the most important
personages in Petersburg, and was a Petersburg grande dame. And, thanks to this
circumstance, she did not carry out her threat to her husband—that is to say, she
remembered that her sister-in-law was coming. "And, aer all, Anna is in no
wise to blame," thought Dolly. "I know nothing of her except the very best, and
I have seen nothing but kindness and aﬀection from her towards myself." It was
true that as far as she could recall her impressions at Petersburg at the Karenins’,
she did not like their household itself; there was something artiﬁcial in the whole
framework of their family life. "But why should I not receive her? If only she
doesn’t take it into her head to console me!" thought Dolly. "All consolation and
counsel and Christian forgiveness, all that I have thought over a thousand times,
and it’s all no use."
All these days Dolly had been alone with her children. She did not want to
talk of her sorrow, but with that sorrow in her heart she could not talk of outside
maers. She knew that in one way or another she would tell Anna everything,
and she was alternately glad at the thought of speaking freely, and angry at the
necessity of speaking of her humiliation with her, his sister, and of hearing her
ready-made phrases of good advice and comfort. She had been on the lookout for
her, glancing at her watch every minute, and, as so oen happens, let slip just that
minute when her visitor arrived, so that she did not hear the bell.
Catching a sound of skirts and light steps at the door, she looked round, and
her care-worn face unconsciously expressed not gladness, but wonder. She got
up and embraced her sister-in-law.
"What, here already!" she said as she kissed her.
"Dolly, how glad I am to see you!"
"I am glad, too," said Dolly, faintly smiling, and trying by the expression of
Anna’s face to ﬁnd out whether she knew. "Most likely she knows," she thought,
noticing the sympathy in Anna’s face. "Well, come along, I’ll take you to your
room," she went on, trying to defer as long as possible the moment of conﬁdences.
"Is this Grisha? Heavens, how he’s grown!" said Anna; and kissing him,
never taking her eyes oﬀ Dolly, she stood still and ﬂushed a lile. "No, please, let
us stay here."
She took oﬀ her kerchief and her hat, and catching it in a lock of her black
hair, which was a mass of curls, she tossed her head and shook her hair down.
"You are radiant with health and happiness!" said Dolly, almost with envy.
"I?…. Yes," said Anna. "Merciful heavens, Tanya! You’re the same age as my
Seryozha," she added, addressing the lile girl as she ran in. She took her in her
arms and kissed her. "Delightful child, delightful! Show me them all."

lxiii
She mentioned them, not only remembering the names, but the years,
months, characters, illnesses of all the children, and Dolly could not but appreciate
that.
"Very well, we will go to them," she said. "It’s a pity Vassya’s asleep."
Aer seeing the children, they sat down, alone now, in the drawing room,
to coﬀee. Anna took the tray, and then pushed it away from her.
"Dolly," she said, "he has told me."
Dolly looked coldly at Anna; she was waiting now for phrases of conventional sympathy, but Anna said nothing of the sort.
"Dolly, dear," she said, "I don’t want to speak for him to you, nor to try to
comfort you; that’s impossible. But, darling, I’m simply sorry, sorry from my
heart for you!"
Under the thick lashes of her shining eyes tears suddenly gliered. She
moved nearer to her sister-in-law and took her hand in her vigorous lile hand.
Dolly did not shrink away, but her face did not lose its frigid expression. She said:
"To comfort me’s impossible. Everything’s lost aer what has happened,
everything’s over!"
And directly she had said this, her face suddenly soened. Anna lied the
wasted, thin hand of Dolly, kissed it and said:
"But, Dolly, what’s to be done, what’s to be done? How is it best to act in
this awful position—that’s what you must think of."
"All’s over, and there’s nothing more," said Dolly. "And the worst of all is,
you see, that I can’t cast him oﬀ: there are the children, I am tied. And I can’t live
with him! it’s a torture to me to see him."
"Dolly, darling, he has spoken to me, but I want to hear it from you: tell me
about it."
Dolly looked at her inquiringly.
Sympathy and love unfeigned were visible on Anna’s face.
"Very well," she said all at once. "But I will tell you it from the beginning.
You know how I was married. With the education mamma gave us I was more
than innocent, I was stupid. I knew nothing. I know they say men tell their wives
of their former lives, but Stiva"—she corrected herself—"Stepan Arkadyevitch told
me nothing. You’ll hardly believe it, but till now I imagined that I was the only
woman he had known. So I lived eight years. You must understand that I was so
far from suspecting inﬁdelity, I regarded it as impossible, and then—try to imagine
it—with such ideas, to ﬁnd out suddenly all the horror, all the loathsomeness….
You must try and understand me. To be fully convinced of one’s happiness, and
all at once…" continued Dolly, holding back her sobs, "to get a leer … his leer to
his mistress, my governess. No, it’s too awful!" She hastily pulled out her handkerchief and hid her face in it. "I can understand being carried away by feeling,"

lxiv
she went on aer a brief silence, "but deliberately, slyly deceiving me … and with
whom?… To go on being my husband together with her … it’s awful! You can’t
understand…"
"Oh, yes, I understand! I understand! Dolly, dearest, I do understand," said
Anna, pressing her hand.
"And do you imagine he realizes all the awfulness of my position?" Dolly
resumed. "Not the slightest! He’s happy and contented."
"Oh, no!" Anna interposed quickly. "He’s to be pitied, he’s weighed down
by remorse…"
"Is he capable of remorse?" Dolly interrupted, gazing intently into her sisterin-law’s face.
"Yes. I know him. I could not look at him without feeling sorry for him. We
both know him. He’s good-hearted, but he’s proud, and now he’s so humiliated.
What touched me most…" (and here Anna guessed what would touch Dolly most)
"he’s tortured by two things: that he’s ashamed for the children’s sake, and that,
loving you—yes, yes, loving you beyond everything on earth," she hurriedly interrupted Dolly, who would have answered—"he has hurt you, pierced you to the
heart. ‘No, no, she cannot forgive me,’ he keeps saying."
Dolly looked dreamily away beyond her sister-in-law as she listened to her
words.
"Yes, I can see that his position is awful; it’s worse for the guilty than the
innocent," she said, "if he feels that all the misery comes from his fault. But how
am I to forgive him, how am I to be his wife again aer her? For me to live with
him now would be torture, just because I love my past love for him…"
And sobs cut short her words. But as though of set design, each time she
was soened she began to speak again of what exasperated her.
"She’s young, you see, she’s prey," she went on. "Do you know, Anna, my
youth and my beauty are gone, taken by whom? By him and his children. I have
worked for him, and all I had has gone in his service, and now of course any fresh,
vulgar creature has more charm for him. No doubt they talked of me together, or,
worse still, they were silent. Do you understand?"
Again her eyes glowed with hatred.
"And aer that he will tell me…. What! can I believe him? Never! No,
everything is over, everything that once made my comfort, the reward of my
work, and my suﬀerings…. Would you believe it, I was teaching Grisha just now:
once this was a joy to me, now it is a torture. What have I to strive and toil for?
Why are the children here? What’s so awful is that all at once my heart’s turned,
and instead of love and tenderness, I have nothing but hatred for him; yes, hatred.
I could kill him."
"Darling Dolly, I understand, but don’t torture yourself. You are so dis-

lxv
tressed, so overwrought, that you look at many things mistakenly."
Dolly grew calmer, and for two minutes both were silent.
"What’s to be done? ink for me, Anna, help me. I have thought over
everything, and I see nothing."
Anna could think of nothing, but her heart responded instantly to each
word, to each change of expression of her sister-in-law.
"One thing I would say," began Anna. "I am his sister, I know his character,
that faculty of forgeing everything, everything" (she waved her hand before her
forehead), "that faculty for being completely carried away, but for completely
repenting too. He cannot believe it, he cannot comprehend now how he can have
acted as he did."
"No; he understands, he understood!" Dolly broke in. "But I … you are
forgeing me … does it make it easier for me?"
"Wait a minute. When he told me, I will own I did not realize all the awfulness of your position. I saw nothing but him, and that the family was broken up.
I felt sorry for him, but aer talking to you, I see it, as a woman, quite diﬀerently.
I see your agony, and I can’t tell you how sorry I am for you! But, Dolly, darling, I fully realize your suﬀerings, only there is one thing I don’t know; I don’t
know … I don’t know how much love there is still in your heart for him. at
you know—whether there is enough for you to be able to forgive him. If there is,
forgive him!"
"No," Dolly was beginning, but Anna cut her short, kissing her hand once
more.
"I know more of the world than you do," she said. "I know how men like
Stiva look at it. You speak of his talking of you with her. at never happened.
Such men are unfaithful, but their home and wife are sacred to them. Somehow or
other these women are still looked on with contempt by them, and do not touch
on their feeling for their family. ey draw a sort of line that can’t be crossed
between them and their families. I don’t understand it, but it is so."
"Yes, but he has kissed her…"
"Dolly, hush, darling. I saw Stiva when he was in love with you. I remember
the time when he came to me and cried, talking of you, and all the poetry and
loiness of his feeling for you, and I know that the longer he has lived with you
the loier you have been in his eyes. You know we have sometimes laughed at
him for puing in at every word: ‘Dolly’s a marvelous woman.’ You have always
been a divinity for him, and you are that still, and this has not been an inﬁdelity
of the heart…"
"But if it is repeated?"
"It cannot be, as I understand it…"
"Yes, but could you forgive it?"

lxvi
"I don’t know, I can’t judge…. Yes, I can," said Anna, thinking a moment;
and grasping the position in her thought and weighing it in her inner balance,
she added: "Yes, I can, I can, I can. Yes, I could forgive it. I could not be the same,
no; but I could forgive it, and forgive it as though it had never been, never been
at all…"
"Oh, of course," Dolly interposed quickly, as though saying what she had
more than once thought, "else it would not be forgiveness. If one forgives, it must
be completely, completely. Come, let us go; I’ll take you to your room," she said,
geing up, and on the way she embraced Anna. "My dear, how glad I am you
came. It has made things beer, ever so much beer."

Chapter 
e whole of that day Anna spent at home, that’s to say at the Oblonskys’, and
received no one, though some of her acquaintances had already heard of her arrival, and came to call the same day. Anna spent the whole morning with Dolly
and the children. She merely sent a brief note to her brother to tell him that he
must not fail to dine at home. "Come, God is merciful," she wrote.
Oblonsky did dine at home: the conversation was general, and his wife,
speaking to him, addressed him as "Stiva," as she had not done before. In the
relations of the husband and wife the same estrangement still remained, but there
was no talk now of separation, and Stepan Arkadyevitch saw the possibility of
explanation and reconciliation.
Immediately aer dinner Kiy came in. She knew Anna Arkadyevna, but
only very slightly, and she came now to her sister’s with some trepidation, at
the prospect of meeting this fashionable Petersburg lady, whom everyone spoke
so highly of. But she made a favorable impression on Anna Arkadyevna—she
saw that at once. Anna was unmistakably admiring her loveliness and her youth:
before Kiy knew where she was she found herself not merely under Anna’s sway,
but in love with her, as young girls do fall in love with older and married women.
Anna was not like a fashionable lady, nor the mother of a boy of eight years old.
In the elasticity of her movements, the freshness and the unﬂagging eagerness
which persisted in her face, and broke out in her smile and her glance, she would
rather have passed for a girl of twenty, had it not been for a serious and at times
mournful look in her eyes, which struck and aracted Kiy. Kiy felt that Anna
was perfectly simple and was concealing nothing, but that she had another higher
world of interests inaccessible to her, complex and poetic.
Aer dinner, when Dolly went away to her own room, Anna rose quickly
and went up to her brother, who was just lighting a cigar.

lxvii
"Stiva," she said to him, winking gaily, crossing him and glancing towards
the door, "go, and God help you."
He threw down the cigar, understanding her, and departed through the
doorway.
When Stepan Arkadyevitch had disappeared, she went back to the sofa
where she had been siing, surrounded by the children. Either because the children saw that their mother was fond of this aunt, or that they felt a special charm
in her themselves, the two elder ones, and the younger following their lead, as
children so oen do, had clung about their new aunt since before dinner, and
would not leave her side. And it had become a sort of game among them to sit a
close as possible to their aunt, to touch her, hold her lile hand, kiss it, play with
her ring, or even touch the ﬂounce of her skirt.
"Come, come, as we were siing before," said Anna Arkadyevna, siing
down in her place.
And again Grisha poked his lile face under her arm, and nestled with his
head on her gown, beaming with pride and happiness.
"And when is your next ball?" she asked Kiy.
"Next week, and a splendid ball. One of those balls where one always enjoys
oneself."
"Why, are there balls where one always enjoys onesel?" Anna said, with
tender irony.
"It’s strange, but there are. At the Bobrishtchevs’ one always enjoys oneself,
and at the Nikitins’ too, while at the Mezhkovs’ it’s always dull. Haven’t you
noticed it?"
"No, my dear, for me there are no balls now where one enjoys oneself," said
Anna, and Kiy detected in her eyes that mysterious world which was not open
to her. "For me there are some less dull and tiresome."
"How can you be dull at a ball?"
"Why should not I be dull at a ball?" inquired Anna.
Kiy perceived that Anna knew what answer would follow.
"Because you always look nicer than anyone."
Anna had the faculty of blushing. She blushed a lile, and said:
"In the ﬁrst place it’s never so; and secondly, if it were, what diﬀerence
would it make to me?"
"Are you coming to this ball?" asked Kiy.
"I imagine it won’t be possible to avoid going. Here, take it," she said to
Tanya, who was pulling the loosely-ﬁing ring oﬀ her white, slender-tipped ﬁnger.
"I shall be so glad if you go. I should so like to see you at a ball."
"Anyway, if I do go, I shall comfort myself with the thought that it’s a plea-

lxviii
sure to you … Grisha, don’t pull my hair. It’s untidy enough without that," she
said, puing up a straying lock, which Grisha had been playing with.
"I imagine you at the ball in lilac."
"And why in lilac precisely?" asked Anna, smiling. "Now, children, run
along, run along. Do you hear? Miss Hoole is calling you to tea," she said, tearing
the children from her, and sending them oﬀ to the dining room.
"I know why you press me to come to the ball. You expect a great deal of
this ball, and you want everyone to be there to take part in it."
"How do you know? Yes."
"Oh! what a happy time you are at," pursued Anna. "I remember, and I know
that blue haze like the mist on the mountains in Switzerland. at mist which
covers everything in that blissful time when childhood is just ending, and out of
that vast circle, happy and gay, there is a path growing narrower and narrower,
and it is delightful and alarming to enter the ballroom, bright and splendid as it
is…. Who has not been through it?"
Kiy smiled without speaking. "But how did she go through it? How I
should like to know all her love story!" thought Kiy, recalling the unromantic
appearance of Alexey Alexandrovitch, her husband.
"I know something. Stiva told me, and I congratulate you. I liked him so
much," Anna continued. "I met Vronsky at the railway station."
"Oh, was he there?" asked Kiy, blushing. "What was it Stiva told you?"
"Stiva gossiped about it all. And I should be so glad … I traveled yesterday
with Vronsky’s mother," she went on; "and his mother talked without a pause of
him, he’s her favorite. I know mothers are partial, but…"
"What did his mother tell you?"
"Oh, a great deal! And I know that he’s her favorite; still one can see how
chivalrous he is…. Well, for instance, she told me that he had wanted to give up
all his property to his brother, that he had done something extraordinary when he
was quite a child, saved a woman out of the water. He’s a hero, in fact," said Anna,
smiling and recollecting the two hundred roubles he had given at the station.
But she did not tell Kiy about the two hundred roubles. For some reason
it was disagreeable to her to think of it. She felt that there was something that
had to do with her in it, and something that ought not to have been.
"She pressed me very much to go and see her," Anna went on; "and I shall be
glad to go to see her tomorrow. Stiva is staying a long while in Dolly’s room, thank
God," Anna added, changing the subject, and geing up, Kiy fancied, displeased
with something.
"No, I’m ﬁrst! No, I!" screamed the children, who had ﬁnished tea, running
up to their Aunt Anna.
"All together," said Anna, and she ran laughing to meet them, and embraced

lxix
and swung round all the throng of swarming children, shrieking with delight.

Chapter 
Dolly came out of her room to the tea of the grown-up people. Stepan Arkadyevitch did not come out. He must have le his wife’s room by the other door.
"I am afraid you’ll be cold upstairs," observed Dolly, addressing Anna; "I
want to move you downstairs, and we shall be nearer."
"Oh, please, don’t trouble about me," answered Anna, looking intently into
Dolly’s face, trying to make out whether there had been a reconciliation or not.
"It will be lighter for you here," answered her sister-in-law.
"I assure you that I sleep everywhere, and always like a marmot."
"What’s the question?" inquired Stepan Arkadyevitch, coming out of his
room and addressing his wife.
From his tone both Kiy and Anna knew that a reconciliation had taken
place.
"I want to move Anna downstairs, but we must hang up blinds. No one
knows how to do it; I must see to it myself," answered Dolly addressing him.
"God knows whether they are fully reconciled," thought Anna, hearing her
tone, cold and composed.
"Oh, nonsense, Dolly, always making diﬃculties," answered her husband.
"Come, I’ll do it all, if you like…"
"Yes, they must be reconciled," thought Anna.
"I know how you do everything," answered Dolly. "You tell Matvey to do
what can’t be done, and go away yourself, leaving him to make a muddle of everything," and her habitual, mocking smile curved the corners of Dolly’s lips as
she spoke.
"Full, full reconciliation, full," thought Anna; "thank God!" and rejoicing that
she was the cause of it, she went up to Dolly and kissed her.
"Not at all. Why do you always look down on me and Matvey?" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, smiling hardly perceptibly, and addressing his wife.
e whole evening Dolly was, as always, a lile mocking in her tone to her
husband, while Stepan Arkadyevitch was happy and cheerful, but not so as to
seem as though, having been forgiven, he had forgoen his oﬀense.
At half-past nine o’clock a particularly joyful and pleasant family conversation over the tea-table at the Oblonskys’ was broken up by an apparently simple
incident. But this simple incident for some reason struck everyone as strange.
Talking about common acquaintances in Petersburg, Anna got up quickly.
"She is in my album," she said; "and, by the way, I’ll show you my Seryozha,"

lxx
she added, with a mother’s smile of pride.
Towards ten o’clock, when she usually said good-night to her son, and oen
before going to a ball put him to bed herself, she felt depressed at being so far from
him; and whatever she was talking about, she kept coming back in thought to her
curly-headed Seryozha. She longed to look at his photograph and talk of him.
Seizing the ﬁrst pretext, she got up, and with her light, resolute step went for her
album. e stairs up to her room came out on the landing of the great warm main
staircase.
Just as she was leaving the drawing room, a ring was heard in the hall.
"Who can that be?" said Dolly.
"It’s early for me to be fetched, and for anyone else it’s late," observed Kiy.
"Sure to be someone with papers for me," put in Stepan Arkadyevitch. When
Anna was passing the top of the staircase, a servant was running up to announce
the visitor, while the visitor himself was standing under a lamp. Anna glancing
down at once recognized Vronsky, and a strange feeling of pleasure and at the
same time of dread of something stirred in her heart. He was standing still, not
taking oﬀ his coat, pulling something out of his pocket. At the instant when she
was just facing the stairs, he raised his eyes, caught sight of her, and into the
expression of his face there passed a shade of embarrassment and dismay. With
a slight inclination of her head she passed, hearing behind her Stepan Arkadyevitch’s loud voice calling him to come up, and the quiet, so, and composed voice
of Vronsky refusing.
When Anna returned with the album, he was already gone, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch was telling them that he had called to inquire about the dinner they
were giving next day to a celebrity who had just arrived. "And nothing would
induce him to come up. What a queer fellow he is!" added Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Kiy blushed. She thought that she was the only person who knew why he
had come, and why he would not come up. "He has been at home," she thought,
"and didn’t ﬁnd me, and thought I should be here, but he did not come up because
he thought it late, and Anna’s here."
All of them looked at each other, saying nothing, and began to look at
Anna’s album.
ere was nothing either exceptional or strange in a man’s calling at halfpast nine on a friend to inquire details of a proposed dinner party and not coming
in, but it seemed strange to all of them. Above all, it seemed strange and not right
to Anna.

Chapter 

lxxi
e ball was only just beginning as Kiy and her mother walked up the great
staircase, ﬂooded with light, and lined with ﬂowers and footmen in powder and
red coats. From the rooms came a constant, steady hum, as from a hive, and
the rustle of movement; and while on the landing between trees they gave last
touches to their hair and dresses before the mirror, they heard from the ballroom
the careful, distinct notes of the ﬁddles of the orchestra beginning the ﬁrst waltz.
A lile old man in civilian dress, arranging his gray curls before another mirror,
and diﬀusing an odor of scent, stumbled against them on the stairs, and stood
aside, evidently admiring Kiy, whom he did not know. A beardless youth, one
of those society youths whom the old Prince Shtcherbatsky called "young bucks,"
in an exceedingly open waistcoat, straightening his white tie as he went, bowed
to them, and aer running by, came back to ask Kiy for a quadrille. As the ﬁrst
quadrille had already been given to Vronsky, she had to promise this youth the
second. An oﬃcer, buoning his glove, stood aside in the doorway, and stroking
his mustache, admired rosy Kiy.
Although her dress, her coiﬀure, and all the preparations for the ball had
cost Kiy great trouble and consideration, at this moment she walked into the
ballroom in her elaborate tulle dress over a pink slip as easily and simply as though
all the rosees and lace, all the minute details of her aire, had not cost her or her
family a moment’s aention, as though she had been born in that tulle and lace,
with her hair done up high on her head, and a rose and two leaves on the top of
it.
When, just before entering the ballroom, the princess, her mother, tried to
turn right side out of the ribbon of her sash, Kiy had drawn back a lile. She
felt that everything must be right of itself, and graceful, and nothing could need
seing straight.
It was one of Kiy’s best days. Her dress was not uncomfortable anywhere;
her lace berthe did not droop anywhere; her rosees were not crushed nor torn
oﬀ; her pink slippers with high, hollowed-out heels did not pinch, but gladdened
her feet; and the thick rolls of fair chignon kept up on her head as if they were
her own hair. All the three buons buoned up without tearing on the long
glove that covered her hand without concealing its lines. e black velvet of her
locket nestled with special soness round her neck. at velvet was delicious; at
home, looking at her neck in the looking glass, Kiy had felt that that velvet was
speaking. About all the rest there might be a doubt, but the velvet was delicious.
Kiy smiled here too, at the ball, when she glanced at it in the glass. Her bare
shoulders and arms gave Kiy a sense of chill marble, a feeling she particularly
liked. Her eyes sparkled, and her rosy lips could not keep from smiling from the
consciousness of her own aractiveness. She had scarcely entered the ballroom
and reached the throng of ladies, all tulle, ribbons, lace, and ﬂowers, waiting to

lxxii
be asked to dance—Kiy was never one of that throng—when she was asked for
a waltz, and asked by the best partner, the ﬁrst star in the hierarchy of the ballroom, a renowned director of dances, a married man, handsome and well-built,
Yegorushka Korsunsky. He had only just le the Countess Bonina, with whom he
had danced the ﬁrst half of the waltz, and, scanning his kingdom—that is to say, a
few couples who had started dancing—he caught sight of Kiy, entering, and ﬂew
up to her with that peculiar, easy amble which is conﬁned to directors of balls.
Without even asking her if she cared to dance, he put out his arm to encircle her
slender waist. She looked round for someone to give her fan to, and their hostess,
smiling to her, took it.
"How nice you’ve come in good time," he said to her, embracing her waist;
"such a bad habit to be late." Bending her le hand, she laid it on his shoulder,
and her lile feet in their pink slippers began swily, lightly, and rhythmically
moving over the slippery ﬂoor in time to the music.
"It’s a rest to waltz with you," he said to her, as they fell into the ﬁrst slow
steps of the waltz. "It’s exquisite—such lightness, precision." He said to her the
same thing he said to almost all his partners whom he knew well.
She smiled at his praise, and continued to look about the room over his
shoulder. She was not like a girl at her ﬁrst ball, for whom all faces in the ballroom
melt into one vision of fairyland. And she was not a girl who had gone the stale
round of balls till every face in the ballroom was familiar and tiresome. But she
was in the middle stage between these two; she was excited, and at the same
time she had suﬃcient self-possession to be able to observe. In the le corner of
the ballroom she saw the cream of society gathered together. ere—incredibly
naked—was the beauty Lidi, Korsunsky’s wife; there was the lady of the house;
there shone the bald head of Krivin, always to be found where the best people
were. In that direction gazed the young men, not venturing to approach. ere,
too, she descried Stiva, and there she saw the exquisite ﬁgure and head of Anna in
a black velvet gown. And he was there. Kiy had not seen him since the evening
she refused Levin. With her long-sighted eyes, she knew him at once, and was
even aware that he was looking at her.
"Another turn, eh? You’re not tired?" said Korsunsky, a lile out of breath.
"No, thank you!"
"Where shall I take you?"
"Madame Karenina’s here, I think … take me to her."
"Wherever you command."
And Korsunsky began waltzing with measured steps straight towards the
group in the le corner, continually saying, "Pardon, mesdames, pardon, pardon,
mesdames"; and steering his course through the sea of lace, tulle, and ribbon,
and not disarranging a feather, he turned his partner sharply round, so that her

lxxiii
slim ankles, in light transparent stockings, were exposed to view, and her train
ﬂoated out in fan shape and covered Krivin’s knees. Korsunsky bowed, set straight
his open shirt front, and gave her his arm to conduct her to Anna Arkadyevna.
Kiy, ﬂushed, took her train from Krivin’s knees, and, a lile giddy, looked round,
seeking Anna. Anna was not in lilac, as Kiy had so urgently wished, but in a
black, low-cut, velvet gown, showing her full throat and shoulders, that looked
as though carved in old ivory, and her rounded arms, with tiny, slender wrists.
e whole gown was trimmed with Venetian guipure. On her head, among her
black hair—her own, with no false additions—was a lile wreath of pansies, and
a bouquet of the same in the black ribbon of her sash among white lace. Her
coiﬀure was not striking. All that was noticeable was the lile wilful tendrils of
her curly hair that would always break free about her neck and temples. Round
her well-cut, strong neck was a thread of pearls.
Kiy had been seeing Anna every day; she adored her, and had pictured
her invariably in lilac. But now seeing her in black, she felt that she had not
fully seen her charm. She saw her now as someone quite new and surprising to
her. Now she understood that Anna could not have been in lilac, and that her
charm was just that she always stood out against her aire, that her dress could
never be noticeable on her. And her black dress, with its sumptuous lace, was not
noticeable on her; it was only the frame, and all that was seen was she—simple,
natural, elegant, and at the same time gay and eager.
She was standing holding herself, as always, very erect, and when Kiy
drew near the group she was speaking to the master of the house, her head slightly
turned towards him.
"No, I don’t throw stones," she was saying, in answer to something, "though
I can’t understand it," she went on, shrugging her shoulders, and she turned at
once with a so smile of protection towards Kiy. With a ﬂying, feminine glance
she scanned her aire, and made a movement of her head, hardly perceptible, but
understood by Kiy, signifying approval of her dress and her looks. "You came
into the room dancing," she added.
"is is one of my most faithful supporters," said Korsunsky, bowing to Anna
Arkadyevna, whom he had not yet seen. "e princess helps to make balls happy
and successful. Anna Arkadyevna, a waltz?" he said, bending down to her.
"Why, have you met?" inquired their host.
"Is there anyone we have not met? My wife and I are like white
wolves—everyone knows us," answered Korsunsky. "A waltz, Anna Arkadyevna?"
"I don’t dance when it’s possible not to dance," she said.
"But tonight it’s impossible," answered Korsunsky.
At that instant Vronsky came up.
"Well, since it’s impossible tonight, let us start," she said, not noticing Vron-

lxxiv
sky’s bow, and she hastily put her hand on Korsunsky’s shoulder.
"What is she vexed with him about?" thought Kiy, discerning that Anna
had intentionally not responded to Vronsky’s bow. Vronsky went up to Kiy
reminding her of the ﬁrst quadrille, and expressing his regret that he had not
seen her all this time. Kiy gazed in admiration at Anna waltzing, and listened
to him. She expected him to ask her for a waltz, but he did not, and she glanced
wonderingly at him. He ﬂushed slightly, and hurriedly asked her to waltz, but he
had only just put his arm round her waist and taken the ﬁrst step when the music
suddenly stopped. Kiy looked into his face, which was so close to her own, and
long aerwards—for several years aer—that look, full of love, to which he made
no response, cut her to the heart with an agony of shame.
"Pardon! pardon! Waltz! waltz!" shouted Korsunsky from the other side
of the room, and seizing the ﬁrst young lady he came across he began dancing
himself.

Chapter 
Vronsky and Kiy waltzed several times round the room. Aer the ﬁrst waltz
Kiy went to her mother, and she had hardly time to say a few words to Countess Nordston when Vronsky came up again for the ﬁrst quadrille. During the
quadrille nothing of any signiﬁcance was said: there was disjointed talk between
them of the Korsunskys, husband and wife, whom he described very amusingly,
as delightful children at forty, and of the future town theater; and only once the
conversation touched her to the quick, when he asked her about Levin, whether
he was here, and added that he liked him so much. But Kiy did not expect much
from the quadrille. She looked forward with a thrill at her heart to the mazurka.
She fancied that in the mazurka everything must be decided. e fact that he did
not during the quadrille ask her for the mazurka did not trouble her. She felt sure
she would dance the mazurka with him as she had done at former balls, and refused ﬁve young men, saying she was engaged for the mazurka. e whole ball up
to the last quadrille was for Kiy an enchanted vision of delightful colors, sounds,
and motions. She only sat down when she felt too tired and begged for a rest. But
as she was dancing the last quadrille with one of the tiresome young men whom
she could not refuse, she chanced to be vis-a-vis with Vronsky and Anna. She had
not been near Anna again since the beginning of the evening, and now again she
saw her suddenly quite new and surprising. She saw in her the signs of that excitement of success she knew so well in herself; she saw that she was intoxicated
with the delighted admiration she was exciting. She knew that feeling and knew
its signs, and saw them in Anna; saw the quivering, ﬂashing light in her eyes, and

lxxv
the smile of happiness and excitement unconsciously playing on her lips, and the
deliberate grace, precision, and lightness of her movements.
"Who?" she asked herself. "All or one?" And not assisting the harassed
young man she was dancing with in the conversation, the thread of which he had
lost and could not pick up again, she obeyed with external liveliness the peremptory shouts of Korsunsky starting them all into the grand rond, and then into the
âine, and at the same time she kept watch with a growing pang at her heart.
"No, it’s not the admiration of the crowd has intoxicated her, but the adoration of
one. And that one? can it be he?" Every time he spoke to Anna the joyous light
ﬂashed into her eyes, and the smile of happiness curved her red lips. she seemed
to make an eﬀort to control herself, to try not to show these signs of delight, but
they came out on her face of themselves. "But what of him?" Kiy looked at him
and was ﬁlled with terror. What was pictured so clearly to Kiy in the mirror of
Anna’s face she saw in him. What had become of his always self-possessed resolute manner, and the carelessly serene expression of his face? Now every time he
turned to her, he bent his head, as though he would have fallen at her feet, and in
his eyes there was nothing but humble submission and dread. "I would not oﬀend
you," his eyes seemed every time to be saying, "but I want to save myself, and I
don’t know how." On his face was a look such as Kiy had never seen before.
ey were speaking of common acquaintances, keeping up the most trivial
conversation, but to Kiy it seemed that every word they said was determining
their fate and hers. And strange it was that they were actually talking of how
absurd Ivan Ivanovitch was with his French, and how the Eletsky girl might have
made a beer match, yet these words had all the while consequence for them, and
they were feeling just as Kiy did. e whole ball, the whole world, everything
seemed lost in fog in Kiy’s soul. Nothing but the stern discipline of her bringingup supported her and forced her to do what was expected of her, that is, to dance,
to answer questions, to talk, even to smile. But before the mazurka, when they
were beginning to rearrange the chairs and a few couples moved out of the smaller
rooms into the big room, a moment of despair and horror came for Kiy. She had
refused ﬁve partners, and now she was not dancing the mazurka. She had not
even a hope of being asked for it, because she was so successful in society that
the idea would never occur to anyone that she had remained disengaged till now.
She would have to tell her mother she felt ill and go home, but she had not the
strength to do this. She felt crushed. She went to the furthest end of the lile
drawing room and sank into a low chair. Her light, transparent skirts rose like a
cloud about her slender waist; one bare, thin, so, girlish arm, hanging listlessly,
was lost in the folds of her pink tunic; in the other she held her fan, and with
rapid, short strokes fanned her burning face. But while she looked like a buerﬂy,
clinging to a blade of grass, and just about to open its rainbow wings for fresh

lxxvi
ﬂight, her heart ached with a horrible despair.
"But perhaps I am wrong, perhaps it was not so?" And again she recalled all
she had seen.
"Kiy, what is it?" said Countess Nordston, stepping noiselessly over the
carpet towards her. "I don’t understand it."
Kiy’s lower lip began to quiver; she got up quickly.
"Kiy, you’re not dancing the mazurka?"
"No, no," said Kiy in a voice shaking with tears.
"He asked her for the mazurka before me," said Countess Nordston, knowing
Kiy would understand who were "he" and "her." "She said: ‘Why, aren’t you
going to dance it with Princess Shtcherbatskaya?’"
"Oh, I don’t care!" answered Kiy.
No one but she herself understood her position; no one knew that she had
just refused the man whom perhaps she loved, and refused him because she had
put her faith in another.
Countess Nordston found Korsunsky, with whom she was to dance the
mazurka, and told him to ask Kiy.
Kiy danced in the ﬁrst couple, and luckily for her she had not to talk,
because Korsunsky was all the time running about directing the ﬁgure. Vronsky
and Anna sat almost opposite her. She saw them with her long-sighted eyes, and
saw them, too, close by, when they met in the ﬁgures, and the more she saw
of them the more convinced was she that her unhappiness was complete. She
saw that they felt themselves alone in that crowded room. And on Vronsky’s
face, always so ﬁrm and independent, she saw that look that had struck her, of
bewilderment and humble submissiveness, like the expression of an intelligent
dog when it has done wrong.
Anna smiled, and her smile was reﬂected by him. She grew thoughtful, and
he became serious. Some supernatural force drew Kiy’s eyes to Anna’s face. She
was fascinating in her simple black dress, fascinating were her round arms with
their bracelets, fascinating was her ﬁrm neck with its thread of pearls, fascinating
the straying curls of her loose hair, fascinating the graceful, light movements of
her lile feet and hands, fascinating was that lovely face in its eagerness, but there
was something terrible and cruel in her fascination.
Kiy admired her more than ever, and more and more acute was her suffering. Kiy felt overwhelmed, and her face showed it. When Vronsky saw her,
coming across her in the mazurka, he did not at once recognize her, she was so
changed.
"Delightful ball!" he said to her, for the sake of saying something.
"Yes," she answered.
In the middle of the mazurka, repeating a complicated ﬁgure, newly in-

lxxvii
vented by Korsunsky, Anna came forward into the center of the circle, chose two
gentlemen, and summoned a lady and Kiy. Kiy gazed at her in dismay as she
went up. Anna looked at her with drooping eyelids, and smiled, pressing her
hand. But, noticing that Kiy only responded to her smile by a look of despair
and amazement, she turned away from her, and began gaily talking to the other
lady.
"Yes, there is something uncanny, devilish and fascinating in her," Kiy said
to herself.
Anna did not mean to stay to supper, but the master of the house began to
press her to do so.
"Nonsense, Anna Arkadyevna," said Korsunsky, drawing her bare arm under
the sleeve of his dress coat, "I’ve such an idea for a cotillion! Un bijou!"
And he moved gradually on, trying to draw her along with him. eir host
smiled approvingly.
"No, I am not going to stay," answered Anna, smiling, but in spite of her
smile, both Korsunsky and the master of the house saw from her resolute tone
that she would not stay.
"No; why, as it is, I have danced more at your ball in Moscow than I have all
the winter in Petersburg," said Anna, looking round at Vronsky, who stood near
her. "I must rest a lile before my journey."
"Are you certainly going tomorrow then?" asked Vronsky.
"Yes, I suppose so," answered Anna, as it were wondering at the boldness of
his question; but the irrepressible, quivering brilliance of her eyes and her smile
set him on ﬁre as she said it.
Anna Arkadyevna did not stay to supper, but went home.

Chapter 
"Yes, there is something in me hateful, repulsive," thought Levin, as he came away
from the Shtcherbatskys’, and walked in the direction of his brother’s lodgings.
"And I don’t get on with other people. Pride, they say. No, I have no pride. If I
had any pride, I should not have put myself in such a position." And he pictured to
himself Vronsky, happy, good-natured, clever, and self-possessed, certainly never
placed in the awful position in which he had been that evening. "Yes, she was
bound to choose him. So it had to be, and I cannot complain of anyone or anything.
I am myself to blame. What right had I to imagine she would care to join her life
to mine? Who am I and what am I? A nobody, not wanted by any one, nor of
use to anybody." And he recalled his brother Nikolay, and dwelt with pleasure
on the thought of him. "Isn’t he right that everything in the world is base and

lxxviii
loathsome? And are we fair in our judgment of brother Nikolay? Of course,
from the point of view of Prokofy, seeing him in a torn cloak and tipsy, he’s a
despicable person. But I know him diﬀerently. I know his soul, and know that we
are like him. And I, instead of going to seek him out, went out to dinner, and came
here." Levin walked up to a lamppost, read his brother’s address, which was in his
pocketbook, and called a sledge. All the long way to his brother’s, Levin vividly
recalled all the facts familiar to him of his brother Nikolay’s life. He remembered
how his brother, while at the university, and for a year aerwards, had, in spite of
the jeers of his companions, lived like a monk, strictly observing all religious rites,
services, and fasts, and avoiding every sort of pleasure, especially women. And
aerwards, how he had all at once broken out: he had associated with the most
horrible people, and rushed into the most senseless debauchery. He remembered
later the scandal over a boy, whom he had taken from the country to bring up,
and, in a ﬁt of rage, had so violently beaten that proceedings were brought against
him for unlawfully wounding. en he recalled the scandal with a sharper, to
whom he had lost money, and given a promissory note, and against whom he
had himself lodged a complaint, asserting that he had cheated him. (is was
the money Sergey Ivanovitch had paid.) en he remembered how he had spent
a night in the lockup for disorderly conduct in the street. He remembered the
shameful proceedings he had tried to get up against his brother Sergey Ivanovitch,
accusing him of not having paid him his share of his mother’s fortune, and the last
scandal, when he had gone to a western province in an oﬃcial capacity, and there
had got into trouble for assaulting a village elder…. It was all horribly disgusting,
yet to Levin it appeared not at all in the same disgusting light as it inevitably
would to those who did not know Nikolay, did not know all his story, did not
know his heart.
Levin remembered that when Nikolay had been in the devout stage, the period of fasts and monks and church services, when he was seeking in religion a
support and a curb for his passionate temperament, everyone, far from encouraging him, had jeered at him, and he, too, with the others. ey had teased him,
called him Noah and Monk; and, when he had broken out, no one had helped him,
but everyone had turned away from him with horror and disgust.
Levin felt that, in spite of all the ugliness of his life, his brother Nikolay, in
his soul, in the very depths of his soul, was no more in the wrong than the people
who despised him. He was not to blame for having been born with his unbridled
temperament and his somehow limited intelligence. But he had always wanted
to be good. "I will tell him everything, without reserve, and I will make him
speak without reserve, too, and I’ll show him that I love him, and so understand
him," Levin resolved to himself, as, towards eleven o’clock, he reached the hotel
of which he had the address.

lxxix
"At the top,  and ," the porter answered Levin’s inquiry.
"At home?"
"Sure to be at home."
e door of No.  was half open, and there came out into the streak of light
thick fumes of cheap, poor tobacco, and the sound of a voice, unknown to Levin;
but he knew at once that his brother was there; he heard his cough.
As he went in the door, the unknown voice was saying:
"It all depends with how much judgment and knowledge the thing’s done."
Konstantin Levin looked in at the door, and saw that the speaker was a
young man with an immense shock of hair, wearing a Russian jerkin, and that a
pockmarked woman in a woolen gown, without collar or cuﬀs, was siing on the
sofa. His brother was not to be seen. Konstantin felt a sharp pang at his heart
at the thought of the strange company in which his brother spent his life. No
one had heard him, and Konstantin, taking oﬀ his galoshes, listened to what the
gentleman in the jerkin was saying. He was speaking of some enterprise.
"Well, the devil ﬂay them, the privileged classes," his brother’s voice responded, with a cough. "Masha! get us some supper and some wine if there’s any
le; or else go and get some."
e woman rose, came out from behind the screen, and saw Konstantin.
"ere’s some gentleman, Nikolay Dmitrievitch," she said.
"Whom do you want?" said the voice of Nikolay Levin, angrily.
"It’s I," answered Konstantin Levin, coming forward into the light.
"Who’s I?" Nikolay’s voice said again, still more angrily. He could be heard
geing up hurriedly, stumbling against something, and Levin saw, facing him
in the doorway, the big, scared eyes, and the huge, thin, stooping ﬁgure of his
brother, so familiar, and yet astonishing in its weirdness and sickliness.
He was even thinner than three years before, when Konstantin Levin had
seen him last. He was wearing a short coat, and his hands and big bones seemed
huger than ever. His hair had grown thinner, the same straight mustaches hid his
lips, the same eyes gazed strangely and naively at his visitor.
"Ah, Kostya!" he exclaimed suddenly, recognizing his brother, and his eyes
lit up with joy. But the same second he looked round at the young man, and
gave the nervous jerk of his head and neck that Konstantin knew so well, as if his
neckband hurt him; and a quite diﬀerent expression, wild, suﬀering, and cruel,
rested on his emaciated face.
"I wrote to you and Sergey Ivanovitch both that I don’t know you and don’t
want to know you. What is it you want?"
He was not at all the same as Konstantin had been fancying him. e worst
and most tiresome part of his character, what made all relations with him so difﬁcult, had been forgoen by Konstantin Levin when he thought of him, and now,

lxxx
when he saw his face, and especially that nervous twitching of his head, he remembered it all.
"I didn’t want to see you for anything," he answered timidly. "I’ve simply
come to see you."
His brother’s timidity obviously soened Nikolay. His lips twitched.
"Oh, so that’s it?" he said. "Well, come in; sit down. Like some supper?
Masha, bring supper for three. No, stop a minute. Do you know who this is?" he
said, addressing his brother, and indicating the gentleman in the jerkin: "is is
Mr. Kritsky, my friend from Kiev, a very remarkable man. He’s persecuted by the
police, of course, because he’s not a scoundrel."
And he looked round in the way he always did at everyone in the room.
Seeing that the woman standing in the doorway was moving to go, he shouted
to her, "Wait a minute, I said." And with the inability to express himself, the incoherence that Konstantin knew so well, he began, with another look round at
everyone, to tell his brother Kritsky’s story: how he had been expelled from the
university for starting a beneﬁt society for the poor students and Sunday schools;
and how he had aerwards been a teacher in a peasant school, and how he had
been driven out of that too, and had aerwards been condemned for something.
"You’re of the Kiev university?" said Konstantin Levin to Kritsky, to break
the awkward silence that followed.
"Yes, I was of Kiev," Kritsky replied angrily, his face darkening.
"And this woman," Nikolay Levin interrupted him, pointing to her, "is the
partner of my life, Marya Nikolaevna. I took her out of a bad house," and he jerked
his neck saying this; "but I love her and respect her, and any one who wants to
know me," he added, raising his voice and kniing his brows, "I beg to love her
and respect her. She’s just the same as my wife, just the same. So now you know
whom you’ve to do with. And if you think you’re lowering yourself, well, here’s
the ﬂoor, there’s the door."
And again his eyes traveled inquiringly over all of them.
"Why I should be lowering myself, I don’t understand."
"en, Masha, tell them to bring supper; three portions, spirits and wine….
No, wait a minute…. No, it doesn’t maer…. Go along."

Chapter 
"So you see," pursued Nikolay Levin, painfully wrinkling his forehead and twitching.
It was obviously diﬃcult for him to think of what to say and do.
"Here, do you see?"… He pointed to some sort of iron bars, fastened together

lxxxi
with strings, lying in a corner of the room. "Do you see that? at’s the beginning
of a new thing we’re going into. It’s a productive association…"
Konstantin scarcely heard him. He looked into his sickly, consumptive face,
and he was more and more sorry for him, and he could not force himself to listen
to what his brother was telling him about the association. He saw that this association was a mere anchor to save him from self-contempt. Nikolay Levin went
on talking:
"You know that capital oppresses the laborer. e laborers with us, the peasants, bear all the burden of labor, and are so placed that however much they work
they can’t escape from their position of beasts of burden. All the proﬁts of labor,
on which they might improve their position, and gain leisure for themselves, and
aer that education, all the surplus values are taken from them by the capitalists.
And society’s so constituted that the harder they work, the greater the proﬁt of
the merchants and landowners, while they stay beasts of burden to the end. And
that state of things must be changed," he ﬁnished up, and he looked questioningly
at his brother.
"Yes, of course," said Konstantin, looking at the patch of red that had come
out on his brother’s projecting cheek bones.
"And so we’re founding a locksmiths’ association, where all the production
and proﬁt and the chief instruments of production will be in common."
"Where is the association to be?" asked Konstantin Levin.
"In the village of Vozdrem, Kazan government."
"But why in a village? In the villages, I think, there is plenty of work as it
is. Why a locksmiths’ association in a village?"
"Why? Because the peasants are just as much slaves as they ever were, and
that’s why you and Sergey Ivanovitch don’t like people to try and get them out
of their slavery," said Nikolay Levin, exasperated by the objection.
Konstantin Levin sighed, looking meanwhile about the cheerless and dirty
room. is sigh seemed to exasperate Nikolay still more.
"I know your and Sergey Ivanovitch’s aristocratic views. I know that he
applies all the power of his intellect to justify existing evils."
"No; and what do you talk of Sergey Ivanovitch for?" said Levin, smiling.
"Sergey Ivanovitch? I’ll tell you what for!" Nikolay Levin shrieked suddenly
at the name of Sergey Ivanovitch. "I’ll tell you what for…. But what’s the use
of talking? ere’s only one thing…. What did you come to me for? You look
down on this, and you’re welcome to,—and go away, in God’s name go away!" he
shrieked, geing up from his chair. "And go away, and go away!"
"I don’t look down on it at all," said Konstantin Levin timidly. "I don’t even
dispute it."
At that instant Marya Nikolaevna came back. Nikolay Levin looked round

lxxxii
angrily at her. She went quickly to him, and whispered something.
"I’m not well; I’ve grown irritable," said Nikolay Levin, geing calmer and
breathing painfully; "and then you talk to me of Sergey Ivanovitch and his article.
It’s such rubbish, such lying, such self-deception. What can a man write of justice
who knows nothing of it? Have you read his article?" he asked Kritsky, siing
down again at the table, and moving back oﬀ half of it the scaered cigarees, so
as to clear a space.
"I’ve not read it," Kritsky responded gloomily, obviously not desiring to enter into the conversation.
"Why not?" said Nikolay Levin, now turning with exasperation upon Kritsky.
"Because I didn’t see the use of wasting my time over it."
"Oh, but excuse me, how did you know it would be wasting your time? at
article’s too deep for many people—that’s to say it’s over their heads. But with
me, it’s another thing; I see through his ideas, and I know where its weakness
lies."
Everyone was mute. Kritsky got up deliberately and reached his cap.
"Won’t you have supper? All right, good-bye! Come round tomorrow with
the locksmith."
Kritsky had hardly gone out when Nikolay Levin smiled and winked.
"He’s no good either," he said. "I see, of course…"
But at that instant Kritsky, at the door, called him…
"What do you want now?" he said, and went out to him in the passage. Le
alone with Marya Nikolaevna, Levin turned to her.
"Have you been long with my brother?" he said to her.
"Yes, more than a year. Nikolay Dmitrievitch’s health has become very poor.
Nikolay Dmitrievitch drinks a great deal," she said.
"at is … how does he drink?"
"Drinks vodka, and it’s bad for him."
"And a great deal?" whispered Levin.
"Yes," she said, looking timidly towards the doorway, where Nikolay Levin
had reappeared.
"What were you talking about?" he said, kniing his brows, and turning his
scared eyes from one to the other. "What was it?"
"Oh, nothing," Konstantin answered in confusion.
"Oh, if you don’t want to say, don’t. Only it’s no good your talking to her.
She’s a wench, and you’re a gentleman," he said with a jerk of the neck. "You
understand everything, I see, and have taken stock of everything, and look with
commiseration on my shortcomings," he began again, raising his voice.
"Nikolay Dmitrievitch, Nikolay Dmitrievitch," whispered Marya Niko-

lxxxiii
laevna, again going up to him.
"Oh, very well, very well!… But where’s the supper? Ah, here it is," he said,
seeing a waiter with a tray. "Here, set it here," he added angrily, and promptly
seizing the vodka, he poured out a glassful and drank it greedily. "Like a drink?"
he turned to his brother, and at once became beer humored.
"Well, enough of Sergey Ivanovitch. I’m glad to see you, anyway. Aer
all’s said and done, we’re not strangers. Come, have a drink. Tell me what you’re
doing," he went on, greedily munching a piece of bread, and pouring out another
glassful. "How are you living?"
"I live alone in the country, as I used to. I’m busy looking aer the land,"
answered Konstantin, watching with horror the greediness with which his brother
ate and drank, and trying to conceal that he noticed it.
"Why don’t you get married?"
"It hasn’t happened so," Konstantin answered, reddening a lile.
"Why not? For me now … everything’s at an end! I’ve made a mess of my
life. But this I’ve said, and I say still, that if my share had been given me when I
needed it, my whole life would have been diﬀerent."
Konstantin made haste to change the conversation.
"Do you know your lile Vanya’s with me, a clerk in the countinghouse at
Pokrovskoe."
Nikolay jerked his neck, and sank into thought.
"Yes, tell me what’s going on at Pokrovskoe. Is the house standing still,
and the birch trees, and our schoolroom? And Philip the gardener, is he living?
How I remember the arbor and the seat! Now mind and don’t alter anything in
the house, but make haste and get married, and make everything as it used to be
again. en I’ll come and see you, if your wife is nice."
"But come to me now," said Levin. "How nicely we would arrange it!"
"I’d come and see you if I were sure I should not ﬁnd Sergey Ivanovitch."
"You wouldn’t ﬁnd him there. I live quite independently of him."
"Yes, but say what you like, you will have to choose between me and him,"
he said, looking timidly into his brother’s face.
is timidity touched Konstantin.
"If you want to hear my confession of faith on the subject, I tell you that
in your quarrel with Sergey Ivanovitch I take neither side. You’re both wrong.
You’re more wrong externally, and he inwardly."
"Ah, ah! You see that, you see that!" Nikolay shouted joyfully.
"But I personally value friendly relations with you more because…"
"Why, why?"
Konstantin could not say that he valued it more because Nikolay was unhappy, and needed aﬀection. But Nikolay knew that this was just what he meant

lxxxiv
to say, and scowling he took up the vodka again.
"Enough, Nikolay Dmitrievitch!" said Marya Nikolaevna, stretching out her
plump, bare arm towards the decanter.
"Let it be! Don’t insist! I’ll beat you!" he shouted.
Marya Nikolaevna smiled a sweet and good-humored smile, which was at
once reﬂected on Nikolay’s face, and she took the bole.
"And do you suppose she understands nothing?" said Nikolay. "She understands it all beer than any of us. Isn’t it true there’s something good and sweet
in her?"
"Were you never before in Moscow?" Konstantin said to her, for the sake of
saying something.
"Only you mustn’t be polite and stiﬀ with her. It frightens her. No one
ever spoke to her so but the justices of the peace who tried her for trying to get
out of a house of ill-fame. Mercy on us, the senselessness in the world!" he cried
suddenly. "ese new institutions, these justices of the peace, rural councils, what
hideousness it all is!"
And he began to enlarge on his encounters with the new institutions.
Konstantin Levin heard him, and the disbelief in the sense of all public institutions, which he shared with him, and oen expressed, was distasteful to him
now from his brother’s lips.
"In another world we shall understand it all," he said lightly.
"In another world! Ah, I don’t like that other world! I don’t like it," he
said, leing his scared eyes rest on his brother’s eyes. "Here one would think
that to get out of all the baseness and the mess, one’s own and other people’s,
would be a good thing, and yet I’m afraid of death, awfully afraid of death." He
shuddered. "But do drink something. Would you like some champagne? Or shall
we go somewhere? Let’s go to the Gypsies! Do you know I have got so fond of
the Gypsies and Russian songs."
His speech had begun to falter, and he passed abruptly from one subject to
another. Konstantin with the help of Masha persuaded him not to go out anywhere, and got him to bed hopelessly drunk.
Masha promised to write to Konstantin in case of need, and to persuade
Nikolay Levin to go and stay with his brother.

Chapter 
In the morning Konstantin Levin le Moscow, and towards evening he reached
home. On the journey in the train he talked to his neighbors about politics and the
new railways, and, just as in Moscow, he was overcome by a sense of confusion of

lxxxv
ideas, dissatisfaction with himself, shame of something or other. But when he got
out at his own station, when he saw his one-eyed coachman, Ignat, with the collar
of his coat turned up; when, in the dim light reﬂected by the station ﬁres, he saw
his own sledge, his own horses with their tails tied up, in their harness trimmed
with rings and tassels; when the coachman Ignat, as he put in his luggage, told him
the village news, that the contractor had arrived, and that Pava had calved,—he
felt that lile by lile the confusion was clearing up, and the shame and selfdissatisfaction were passing away. He felt this at the mere sight of Ignat and the
horses; but when he had put on the sheepskin brought for him, had sat down
wrapped up in the sledge, and had driven oﬀ pondering on the work that lay
before him in the village, and staring at the side-horse, that had been his saddlehorse, past his prime now, but a spirited beast from the Don, he began to see what
had happened to him in quite a diﬀerent light. He felt himself, and did not want to
be any one else. All he wanted now was to be beer than before. In the ﬁrst place
he resolved that from that day he would give up hoping for any extraordinary
happiness, such as marriage must have given him, and consequently he would
not so disdain what he really had. Secondly, he would never again let himself
give way to low passion, the memory of which had so tortured him when he
had been making up his mind to make an oﬀer. en remembering his brother
Nikolay, he resolved to himself that he would never allow himself to forget him,
that he would follow him up, and not lose sight of him, so as to be ready to help
when things should go ill with him. And that would be soon, he felt. en, too,
his brother’s talk of communism, which he had treated so lightly at the time, now
made him think. He considered a revolution in economic conditions nonsense.
But he always felt the injustice of his own abundance in comparison with the
poverty of the peasants, and now he determined that so as to feel quite in the
right, though he had worked hard and lived by no means luxuriously before, he
would now work still harder, and would allow himself even less luxury. And all
this seemed to him so easy a conquest over himself that he spent the whole drive
in the pleasantest daydreams. With a resolute feeling of hope in a new, beer life,
he reached home before nine o’clock at night.
e snow of the lile quadrangle before the house was lit up by a light in the
bedroom windows of his old nurse, Agafea Mihalovna, who performed the duties
of housekeeper in his house. She was not yet asleep. Kouzma, waked up by her,
came sidling sleepily out onto the steps. A seer bitch, Laska, ran out too, almost
upseing Kouzma, and whining, turned round about Levin’s knees, jumping up
and longing, but not daring, to put her forepaws on his chest.
"You’re soon back again, sir," said Agafea Mihalovna.
"I got tired of it, Agafea Mihalovna. With friends, one is well; but at home,
one is beer," he answered, and went into his study.

lxxxvi
e study was slowly lit up as the candle was brought in. e familiar
details came out: the stag’s horns, the bookshelves, the looking-glass, the stove
with its ventilator, which had long wanted mending, his father’s sofa, a large
table, on the table an open book, a broken ash tray, a manuscript book with his
handwriting. As he saw all this, there came over him for an instant a doubt of the
possibility of arranging the new life, of which he had been dreaming on the road.
All these traces of his life seemed to clutch him, and to say to him: "No, you’re not
going to get away from us, and you’re not going to be diﬀerent, but you’re going
to be the same as you’ve always been; with doubts, everlasting dissatisfaction
with yourself, vain eﬀorts to amend, and falls, and everlasting expectation, of a
happiness which you won’t get, and which isn’t possible for you."
is the things said to him, but another voice in his heart was telling him
that he must not fall under the sway of the past, and that one can do anything
with oneself. And hearing that voice, he went into the corner where stood his two
heavy dumbbells, and began brandishing them like a gymnast, trying to restore
his conﬁdent temper. ere was a creak of steps at the door. He hastily put down
the dumbbells.
e bailiﬀ came in, and said everything, thank God, was doing well; but
informed him that the buckwheat in the new drying machine had been a lile
scorched. is piece of news irritated Levin. e new drying machine had been
constructed and partly invented by Levin. e bailiﬀ had always been against
the drying machine, and now it was with suppressed triumph that he announced
that the buckwheat had been scorched. Levin was ﬁrmly convinced that if the
buckwheat had been scorched, it was only because the precautions had not been
taken, for which he had hundreds of times given orders. He was annoyed, and
reprimanded the bailiﬀ. But there had been an important and joyful event: Pava,
his best cow, an expensive beast, bought at a show, had calved.
"Kouzma, give me my sheepskin. And you tell them to take a lantern. I’ll
come and look at her," he said to the bailiﬀ.
e cowhouse for the more valuable cows was just behind the house. Walking across the yard, passing a snowdri by the lilac tree, he went into the cowhouse. ere was the warm, steamy smell of dung when the frozen door was
opened, and the cows, astonished at the unfamiliar light of the lantern, stirred
on the fresh straw. He caught a glimpse of the broad, smooth, black and piebald
back of Hollandka. Berkoot, the bull, was lying down with his ring in his lip, and
seemed about to get up, but thought beer of it, and only gave two snorts as they
passed by him. Pava, a perfect beauty, huge as a hippopotamus, with her back
turned to them, prevented their seeing the calf, as she sniﬀed her all over.
Levin went into the pen, looked Pava over, and lied the red and spoed
calf onto her long, toering legs. Pava, uneasy, began lowing, but when Levin put

lxxxvii
the calf close to her she was soothed, and, sighing heavily, began licking her with
her rough tongue. e calf, fumbling, poked her nose under her mother’s udder,
and stiﬀened her tail out straight.
"Here, bring the light, Fyodor, this way," said Levin, examining the calf. "Like
the mother! though the color takes aer the father; but that’s nothing. Very good.
Long and broad in the haunch. Vassily Fedorovitch, isn’t she splendid?" he said
to the bailiﬀ, quite forgiving him for the buckwheat under the inﬂuence of his
delight in the calf.
"How could she fail to be? Oh, Semyon the contractor came the day aer
you le. You must sele with him, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," said the bailiﬀ. "I
did inform you about the machine."
is question was enough to take Levin back to all the details of his work
on the estate, which was on a large scale, and complicated. He went straight from
the cowhouse to the counting house, and aer a lile conversation with the bailiﬀ
and Semyon the contractor, he went back to the house and straight upstairs to the
drawing room.

Chapter 
e house was big and old-fashioned, and Levin, though he lived alone, had the
whole house heated and used. He knew that this was stupid, he knew that it was
positively not right, and contrary to his present new plans, but this house was a
whole world to Levin. It was the world in which his father and mother had lived
and died. ey had lived just the life that to Levin seemed the ideal of perfection,
and that he had dreamed of beginning with his wife, his family.
Levin scarcely remembered his mother. His conception of her was for him a
sacred memory, and his future wife was bound to be in his imagination a repetition
of that exquisite, holy ideal of a woman that his mother had been.
He was so far from conceiving of love for woman apart from marriage that
he positively pictured to himself ﬁrst the family, and only secondarily the woman
who would give him a family. His ideas of marriage were, consequently, quite
unlike those of the great majority of his acquaintances, for whom geing married
was one of the numerous facts of social life. For Levin it was the chief aﬀair of
life, on which its whole happiness turned. And now he had to give up that.
When he had gone into the lile drawing room, where he always had tea,
and had seled himself in his armchair with a book, and Agafea Mihalovna had
brought him tea, and with her usual, "Well, I’ll stay a while, sir," had taken a chair
in the window, he felt that, however strange it might be, he had not parted from
his daydreams, and that he could not live without them. Whether with her, or

lxxxviii
with another, still it would be. He was reading a book, and thinking of what he
was reading, and stopping to listen to Agafea Mihalovna, who gossiped away
without ﬂagging, and yet with all that, all sorts of pictures of family life and work
in the future rose disconnectedly before his imagination. He felt that in the depth
of his soul something had been put in its place, seled down, and laid to rest.
He heard Agafea Mihalovna talking of how Prohor had forgoen his duty to
God, and with the money Levin had given him to buy a horse, had been drinking
without stopping, and had beaten his wife till he’d half killed her. He listened,
and read his book, and recalled the whole train of ideas suggested by his reading.
It was Tyndall’s Treatise on Heat. He recalled his own criticisms of Tyndall of his
complacent satisfaction in the cleverness of his experiments, and for his lack of
philosophic insight. And suddenly there ﬂoated into his mind the joyful thought:
"In two years’ time I shall have two Dutch cows; Pava herself will perhaps still be
alive, a dozen young daughters of Berkoot and the three others—how lovely!"
He took up his book again. "Very good, electricity and heat are the same
thing; but is it possible to substitute the one quantity for the other in the equation
for the solution of any problem? No. Well, then what of it? e connection
between all the forces of nature is felt instinctively…. It’s particulary nice if Pava’s
daughter should be a red-spoed cow, and all the herd will take aer her, and the
other three, too! Splendid! To go out with my wife and visitors to meet the herd….
My wife says, ‘Kostya and I looked aer that calf like a child.’ ‘How can it interest
you so much?’ says a visitor. ‘Everything that interests him, interests me.’ But
who will she be?" And he remembered what had happened at Moscow…. "Well,
there’s nothing to be done…. It’s not my fault. But now everything shall go on in
a new way. It’s nonsense to pretend that life won’t let one, that the past won’t let
one. One must struggle to live beer, much beer."… He raised his head, and fell
to dreaming. Old Laska, who had not yet fully digested her delight at his return,
and had run out into the yard to bark, came back wagging her tail, and crept up to
him, bringing in the scent of fresh air, put her head under his hand, and whined
plaintively, asking to be stroked.
"ere, who’d have thought it?" said Agafea Mihalovna. "e dog now …
why, she understands that her master’s come home, and that he’s low-spirited."
"Why low-spirited?"
"Do you suppose I don’t see it, sir? It’s high time I should know the gentry.
Why, I’ve grown up from a lile thing with them. It’s nothing, sir, so long as
there’s health and a clear conscience."
Levin looked intently at her, surprised at how well she knew his thought.
"Shall I fetch you another cup?" said she, and taking his cup she went out.
Laska kept poking her head under his hand. He stroked her, and she
promptly curled up at his feet, laying her head on a hindpaw. And in token of all

lxxxix
now being well and satisfactory, she opened her mouth a lile, smacked her lips,
and seling her sticky lips more comfortably about her old teeth, she sank into
blissful repose. Levin watched all her movements aentively.
"at’s what I’ll do," he said to himself; "that’s what I’ll do! Nothing’s
amiss…. All’s well."

Chapter 
Aer the ball, early next morning, Anna Arkadyevna sent her husband a telegram
that she was leaving Moscow the same day.
"No, I must go, I must go"; she explained to her sister-in-law the change in
her plans in a tone that suggested that she had to remember so many things that
there was no enumerating them: "no, it had really beer be today!"
Stepan Arkadyevitch was not dining at home, but he promised to come and
see his sister oﬀ at seven o’clock.
Kiy, too, did not come, sending a note that she had a headache. Dolly and
Anna dined alone with the children and the English governess. Whether it was
that the children were ﬁckle, or that they had acute senses, and felt that Anna was
quite diﬀerent that day from what she had been when they had taken such a fancy
to her, that she was not now interested in them,—but they had abruptly dropped
their play with their aunt, and their love for her, and were quite indiﬀerent that
she was going away. Anna was absorbed the whole morning in preparations
for her departure. She wrote notes to her Moscow acquaintances, put down her
accounts, and packed. Altogether Dolly fancied she was not in a placid state of
mind, but in that worried mood, which Dolly knew well with herself, and which
does not come without cause, and for the most part covers dissatisfaction with
self. Aer dinner, Anna went up to her room to dress, and Dolly followed her.
"How queer you are today!" Dolly said to her.
"I? Do you think so? I’m not queer, but I’m nasty. I am like that sometimes. I keep feeling as if I could cry. It’s very stupid, but it’ll pass oﬀ," said Anna
quickly, and she bent her ﬂushed face over a tiny bag in which she was packing a
nightcap and some cambric handkerchiefs. Her eyes were particularly bright, and
were continually swimming with tears. "In the same way I didn’t want to leave
Petersburg, and now I don’t want to go away from here."
"You came here and did a good deed," said Dolly, looking intently at her.
Anna looked at her with eyes wet with tears.
"Don’t say that, Dolly. I’ve done nothing, and could do nothing. I oen
wonder why people are all in league to spoil me. What have I done, and what
could I do? In your heart there was found love enough to forgive…"

xc
"If it had not been for you, God knows what would have happened! How
happy you are, Anna!" said Dolly. "Everything is clear and good in your heart."
"Every heart has its own skeletons, as the English say."
"You have no sort of skeleton, have you? Everything is so clear in you."
"I have!" said Anna suddenly, and, unexpectedly aer her tears, a sly, ironical smile curved her lips.
"Come, he’s amusing, anyway, your skeleton, and not depressing," said Dolly,
smiling.
"No, he’s depressing. Do you know why I’m going today instead of tomorrow? It’s a confession that weighs on me; I want to make it to you," said Anna,
leing herself drop deﬁnitely into an armchair, and looking straight into Dolly’s
face.
And to her surprise Dolly saw that Anna was blushing up to her ears, up to
the curly black ringlets on her neck.
"Yes," Anna went on. "Do you know why Kiy didn’t come to dinner? She’s
jealous of me. I have spoiled … I’ve been the cause of that ball being a torture
to her instead of a pleasure. But truly, truly, it’s not my fault, or only my fault a
lile bit," she said, daintily drawling the words "a lile bit."
"Oh, how like Stiva you said that!" said Dolly, laughing.
Anna was hurt.
"Oh no, oh no! I’m not Stiva," she said, kniing her brows. "at’s why I’m
telling you, just because I could never let myself doubt myself for an instant," said
Anna.
But at the very moment she was uering the words, she felt that they were
not true. She was not merely doubting herself, she felt emotion at the thought of
Vronsky, and was going away sooner than she had meant, simply to avoid meeting
him.
"Yes, Stiva told me you danced the mazurka with him, and that he…"
"You can’t imagine how absurdly it all came about. I only meant to be
matchmaking, and all at once it turned out quite diﬀerently. Possibly against
my own will…"
She crimsoned and stopped.
"Oh, they feel it directly?" said Dolly.
"But I should be in despair if there were anything serious in it on his side,"
Anna interrupted her. "And I am certain it will all be forgoen, and Kiy will
leave oﬀ hating me."
"All the same, Anna, to tell you the truth, I’m not very anxious for this
marriage for Kiy. And it’s beer it should come to nothing, if he, Vronsky, is
capable of falling in love with you in a single day."
"Oh, heavens, that would be too silly!" said Anna, and again a deep ﬂush of

xci
pleasure came out on her face, when she heard the idea, that absorbed her, put
into words. "And so here I am going away, having made an enemy of Kiy, whom
I liked so much! Ah, how sweet she is! But you’ll make it right, Dolly? Eh?"
Dolly could scarcely suppress a smile. She loved Anna, but she enjoyed
seeing that she too had her weaknesses.
"An enemy? at can’t be."
"I did so want you all to care for me, as I do for you, and now I care for you
more than ever," said Anna, with tears in her eyes. "Ah, how silly I am today!"
She passed her handkerchief over her face and began dressing.
At the very moment of starting Stepan Arkadyevitch arrived, late, rosy and
good-humored, smelling of wine and cigars.
Anna’s emotionalism infected Dolly, and when she embraced her sister-inlaw for the last time, she whispered: "Remember, Anna, what you’ve done for
me—I shall never forget. And remember that I love you, and shall always love
you as my dearest friend!"
"I don’t know why," said Anna, kissing her and hiding her tears.
"You understood me, and you understand. Good-bye, my darling!"

Chapter 
"Come, it’s all over, and thank God!" was the ﬁrst thought that came to Anna
Arkadyevna, when she had said good-bye for the last time to her brother, who
had stood blocking up the entrance to the carriage till the third bell rang. She
sat down on her lounge beside Annushka, and looked about her in the twilight
of the sleeping-carriage. "ank God! tomorrow I shall see Seryozha and Alexey
Alexandrovitch, and my life will go on in the old way, all nice and as usual."
Still in the same anxious frame of mind, as she had been all that day, Anna
took pleasure in arranging herself for the journey with great care. With her lile
de hands she opened and shut her lile red bag, took out a cushion, laid it on her
knees, and carefully wrapping up her feet, seled herself comfortably. An invalid
lady had already lain down to sleep. Two other ladies began talking to Anna, and
a stout elderly lady tucked up her feet, and made observations about the heating
of the train. Anna answered a few words, but not foreseeing any entertainment
from the conversation, she asked Annushka to get a lamp, hooked it onto the arm
of her seat, and took from her bag a paper knife and an English novel. At ﬁrst
her reading made no progress. e fuss and bustle were disturbing; then when
the train had started, she could not help listening to the noises; then the snow
beating on the le window and sticking to the pane, and the sight of the muﬄed
guard passing by, covered with snow on one side, and the conversations about

xcii
the terrible snowstorm raging outside, distracted her aention. Farther on, it was
continually the same again and again: the same shaking and raling, the same
snow on the window, the same rapid transitions from steaming heat to cold, and
back again to heat, the same passing glimpses of the same ﬁgures in the twilight,
and the same voices, and Anna began to read and to understand what she read.
Annushka was already dozing, the red bag on her lap, clutched by her broad hands,
in gloves, of which one was torn. Anna Arkadyevna read and understood, but it
was distasteful to her to read, that is, to follow the reﬂection of other people’s
lives. She had too great a desire to live herself. If she read that the heroine of
the novel was nursing a sick man, she longed to move with noiseless steps about
the room of a sick man; if she read of a member of Parliament making a speech,
she longed to be delivering the speech; if she read of how Lady Mary had ridden
aer the hounds, and had provoked her sister-in-law, and had surprised everyone
by her boldness, she too wished to be doing the same. But there was no chance
of doing anything; and twisting the smooth paper knife in her lile hands, she
forced herself to read.
e hero of the novel was already almost reaching his English happiness,
a baronetcy and an estate, and Anna was feeling a desire to go with him to the
estate, when she suddenly felt that he ought to feel ashamed, and that she was
ashamed of the same thing. But what had he to be ashamed o? "What have I to
be ashamed o?" she asked herself in injured surprise. She laid down the book and
sank against the back of the chair, tightly gripping the paper cuer in both hands.
ere was nothing. She went over all her Moscow recollections. All were good,
pleasant. She remembered the ball, remembered Vronsky and his face of slavish
adoration, remembered all her conduct with him: there was nothing shameful.
And for all that, at the same point in her memories, the feeling of shame was
intensiﬁed, as though some inner voice, just at the point when she thought of
Vronsky, were saying to her, "Warm, very warm, hot." "Well, what is it?" she said
to herself resolutely, shiing her seat in the lounge. "What does it mean? Am I
afraid to look it straight in the face? Why, what is it? Can it be that between me
and this oﬃcer boy there exist, or can exist, any other relations than such as are
common with every acquaintance?" She laughed contemptuously and took up her
book again; but now she was deﬁnitely unable to follow what she read. She passed
the paper knife over the window pane, then laid its smooth, cool surface to her
cheek, and almost laughed aloud at the feeling of delight that all at once without
cause came over her. She felt as though her nerves were strings being strained
tighter and tighter on some sort of screwing peg. She felt her eyes opening wider
and wider, her ﬁngers and toes twitching nervously, something within oppressing
her breathing, while all shapes and sounds seemed in the uncertain half-light
to strike her with unaccustomed vividness. Moments of doubt were continually

xciii
coming upon her, when she was uncertain whether the train were going forwards
or backwards, or were standing still altogether; whether it were Annushka at her
side or a stranger. "What’s that on the arm of the chair, a fur cloak or some beast?
And what am I mysel? Myself or some other woman?" She was afraid of giving
way to this delirium. But something drew her towards it, and she could yield
to it or resist it at will. She got up to rouse herself, and slipped oﬀ her plaid
and the cape of her warm dress. For a moment she regained her self-possession,
and realized that the thin peasant who had come in wearing a long overcoat,
with buons missing from it, was the stoveheater, that he was looking at the
thermometer, that it was the wind and snow bursting in aer him at the door; but
then everything grew blurred again…. at peasant with the long waist seemed
to be gnawing something on the wall, the old lady began stretching her legs the
whole length of the carriage, and ﬁlling it with a black cloud; then there was a
fearful shrieking and banging, as though someone were being torn to pieces; then
there was a blinding dazzle of red ﬁre before her eyes and a wall seemed to rise
up and hide everything. Anna felt as though she were sinking down. But it was
not terrible, but delightful. e voice of a man muﬄed up and covered with snow
shouted something in her ear. She got up and pulled herself together; she realized
that they had reached a station and that this was the guard. She asked Annushka
to hand her the cape she had taken oﬀ and her shawl, put them on and moved
towards the door.
"Do you wish to get out?" asked Annushka.
"Yes, I want a lile air. It’s very hot in here." And she opened the door. e
driving snow and the wind rushed to meet her and struggled with her over the
door. But she enjoyed the struggle.
She opened the door and went out. e wind seemed as though lying in
wait for her; with gleeful whistle it tried to snatch her up and bear her oﬀ, but she
clung to the cold door post, and holding her skirt got down onto the platform and
under the shelter of the carriages. e wind had been powerful on the steps, but
on the platform, under the lee of the carriages, there was a lull. With enjoyment
she drew deep breaths of the frozen, snowy air, and standing near the carriage
looked about the platform and the lighted station.

Chapter 
e raging tempest rushed whistling between the wheels of the carriages, about
the scaﬀolding, and round the corner of the station. e carriages, posts, people,
everything that was to be seen was covered with snow on one side, and was getting more and more thickly covered. For a moment there would come a lull in the

xciv
storm, but then it would swoop down again with such onslaughts that it seemed
impossible to stand against it. Meanwhile men ran to and fro, talking merrily
together, their steps crackling on the platform as they continually opened and
closed the big doors. e bent shadow of a man glided by at her feet, and she
heard sounds of a hammer upon iron. "Hand over that telegram!" came an angry
voice out of the stormy darkness on the other side. "is way! No. !" several
diﬀerent voices shouted again, and muﬄed ﬁgures ran by covered with snow.
Two gentlemen with lighted cigarees passed by her. She drew one more deep
breath of the fresh air, and had just put her hand out of her muﬀ to take hold
of the door post and get back into the carriage, when another man in a military
overcoat, quite close beside her, stepped between her and the ﬂickering light of
the lamp post. She looked round, and the same instant recognized Vronsky’s face.
Puing his hand to the peak of his cap, he bowed to her and asked, Was there
anything she wanted? Could he be of any service to her? She gazed rather a
long while at him without answering, and, in spite of the shadow in which he
was standing, she saw, or fancied she saw, both the expression of his face and
his eyes. It was again that expression of reverential ecstasy which had so worked
upon her the day before. More than once she had told herself during the past few
days, and again only a few moments before, that Vronsky was for her only one of
the hundreds of young men, forever exactly the same, that are met everywhere,
that she would never allow herself to bestow a thought upon him. But now at the
ﬁrst instant of meeting him, she was seized by a feeling of joyful pride. She had
no need to ask why he had come. She knew as certainly as if he had told her that
he was here to be where she was.
"I didn’t know you were going. What are you coming for?" she said, leing
fall the hand with which she had grasped the door post. And irrepressible delight
and eagerness shone in her face.
"What am I coming for?" he repeated, looking straight into her eyes. "You
know that I have come to be where you are," he said; "I can’t help it."
At that moment the wind, as it were, surmounting all obstacles, sent the
snow ﬂying from the carriage roofs, and clanked some sheet of iron it had torn oﬀ,
while the hoarse whistle of the engine roared in front, plaintively and gloomily.
All the awfulness of the storm seemed to her more splendid now. He had said
what her soul longed to hear, though she feared it with her reason. She made no
answer, and in her face he saw conﬂict.
"Forgive me, if you dislike what I said," he said humbly.
He had spoken courteously, deferentially, yet so ﬁrmly, so stubbornly, that
for a long while she could make no answer.
"It’s wrong, what you say, and I beg you, if you’re a good man, to forget
what you’ve said, as I forget it," she said at last.

xcv
"Not one word, not one gesture of yours shall I, could I, ever forget…"
"Enough, enough!" she cried trying assiduously to give a stern expression
to her face, into which he was gazing greedily. And clutching at the cold door
post, she clambered up the steps and got rapidly into the corridor of the carriage. But in the lile corridor she paused, going over in her imagination what
had happened. ough she could not recall her own words or his, she realized
instinctively that the momentary conversation had brought them fearfully closer;
and she was panic-stricken and blissful at it. Aer standing still a few seconds,
she went into the carriage and sat down in her place. e overstrained condition
which had tormented her before did not only come back, but was intensiﬁed, and
reached such a pitch that she was afraid every minute that something would snap
within her from the excessive tension. She did not sleep all night. But in that
nervous tension, and in the visions that ﬁlled her imagination, there was nothing
disagreeable or gloomy: on the contrary there was something blissful, glowing,
and exhilarating. Towards morning Anna sank into a doze, siing in her place,
and when she waked it was daylight and the train was near Petersburg. At once
thoughts of home, of husband and of son, and the details of that day and the
following came upon her.
At Petersburg, as soon as the train stopped and she got out, the ﬁrst person
that aracted her aention was her husband. "Oh, mercy! why do his ears look
like that?" she thought, looking at his frigid and imposing ﬁgure, and especially
the ears that struck her at the moment as propping up the brim of his round hat.
Catching sight of her, he came to meet her, his lips falling into their habitual
sarcastic smile, and his big, tired eyes looking straight at her. An unpleasant
sensation gripped at her heart when she met his obstinate and weary glance, as
though she had expected to see him diﬀerent. She was especially struck by the
feeling of dissatisfaction with herself that she experienced on meeting him. at
feeling was an intimate, familiar feeling, like a consciousness of hypocrisy, which
she experienced in her relations with her husband. But hitherto she had not taken
note of the feeling, now she was clearly and painfully aware of it.
"Yes, as you see, your tender spouse, as devoted as the ﬁrst year aer marriage, burned with impatience to see you," he said in his deliberate, high-pitched
voice, and in that tone which he almost always took with her, a tone of jeering at
anyone who should say in earnest what he said.
"Is Seryozha quite well?" she asked.
"And is this all the reward," said he, "for my ardor? He’s quite well…"

Chapter 

xcvi
Vronsky had not even tried to sleep all that night. He sat in his armchair, looking
straight before him or scanning the people who got in and out. If he had indeed
on previous occasions struck and impressed people who did not know him by his
air of unhesitating composure, he seemed now more haughty and self-possessed
than ever. He looked at people as if they were things. A nervous young man, a
clerk in a law court, siing opposite him, hated him for that look. e young man
asked him for a light, and entered into conversation with him, and even pushed
against him, to make him feel that he was not a thing, but a person. But Vronsky
gazed at him exactly as he did at the lamp, and the young man made a wry face,
feeling that he was losing his self-possession under the oppression of this refusal
to recognize him as a person.
Vronsky saw nothing and no one. He felt himself a king, not because he believed that he had made an impression on Anna—he did not yet believe that,—but
because the impression she had made on him gave him happiness and pride.
What would come of it all he did not know, he did not even think. He felt
that all his forces, hitherto dissipated, wasted, were centered on one thing, and
bent with fearful energy on one blissful goal. And he was happy at it. He knew
only that he had told her the truth, that he had come where she was, that all
the happiness of his life, the only meaning in life for him, now lay in seeing and
hearing her. And when he got out of the carriage at Bologova to get some seltzer
water, and caught sight of Anna, involuntarily his ﬁrst word had told her just
what he thought. And he was glad he had told her it, that she knew it now and
was thinking of it. He did not sleep all night. When he was back in the carriage,
he kept unceasingly going over every position in which he had seen her, every
word she had uered, and before his fancy, making his heart faint with emotion,
ﬂoated pictures of a possible future.
When he got out of the train at Petersburg, he felt aer his sleepless night as
keen and fresh as aer a cold bath. He paused near his compartment, waiting for
her to get out. "Once more," he said to himself, smiling unconsciously, "once more
I shall see her walk, her face; she will say something, turn her head, glance, smile,
maybe." But before he caught sight of her, he saw her husband, whom the stationmaster was deferentially escorting through the crowd. "Ah, yes! e husband."
Only now for the ﬁrst time did Vronsky realize clearly the fact that there was
a person aached to her, a husband. He knew that she had a husband, but had
hardly believed in his existence, and only now fully believed in him, with his
head and shoulders, and his legs clad in black trousers; especially when he saw
this husband calmly take her arm with a sense of property.
Seeing Alexey Alexandrovitch with his Petersburg face and severely selfconﬁdent ﬁgure, in his round hat, with his rather prominent spine, he believed in
him, and was aware of a disagreeable sensation, such as a man might feel tortured

xcvii
by thirst, who, on reaching a spring, should ﬁnd a dog, a sheep, or a pig, who has
drunk of it and muddied the water. Alexey Alexandrovitch’s manner of walking,
with a swing of the hips and ﬂat feet, particularly annoyed Vronsky. He could
recognize in no one but himself an indubitable right to love her. But she was still
the same, and the sight of her aﬀected him the same way, physically reviving him,
stirring him, and ﬁlling his soul with rapture. He told his German valet, who ran
up to him from the second class, to take his things and go on, and he himself went
up to her. He saw the ﬁrst meeting between the husband and wife, and noted with
a lover’s insight the signs of slight reserve with which she spoke to her husband.
"No, she does not love him and cannot love him," he decided to himself.
At the moment when he was approaching Anna Arkadyevna he noticed too
with joy that she was conscious of his being near, and looked round, and seeing
him, turned again to her husband.
"Have you passed a good night?" he asked, bowing to her and her husband
together, and leaving it up to Alexey Alexandrovitch to accept the bow on his own
account, and to recognize it or not, as he might see ﬁt.
"ank you, very good," she answered.
Her face looked weary, and there was not that play of eagerness in it,
peeping out in her smile and her eyes; but for a single instant, as she glanced
at him, there was a ﬂash of something in her eyes, and although the ﬂash died
away at once, he was happy for that moment. She glanced at her husband to
ﬁnd out whether he knew Vronsky. Alexey Alexandrovitch looked at Vronsky
with displeasure, vaguely recalling who this was. Vronsky’s composure and selfconﬁdence here struck, like a scythe against a stone, upon the cold self-conﬁdence
of Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"Count Vronsky," said Anna.
"Ah! We are acquainted, I believe," said Alexey Alexandrovitch indiﬀerently,
giving his hand.
"You set oﬀ with the mother and you return with the son," he said, articulating each syllable, as though each were a separate favor he was bestowing.
"You’re back from leave, I suppose?" he said, and without waiting for a reply,
he turned to his wife in his jesting tone: "Well, were a great many tears shed at
Moscow at parting?"
By addressing his wife like this he gave Vronsky to understand that he
wished to be le alone, and, turning slightly towards him, he touched his hat;
but Vronsky turned to Anna Arkadyevna.
"I hope I may have the honor of calling on you," he said.
Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced with his weary eyes at Vronsky.
"Delighted," he said coldly. "On Mondays we’re at home. Most fortunate,"
he said to his wife, dismissing Vronsky altogether, "that I should just have half an

xcviii
hour to meet you, so that I can prove my devotion," he went on in the same jesting
tone.
"You lay too much stress on your devotion for me to value it much," she
responded in the same jesting tone, involuntarily listening to the sound of Vronsky’s steps behind them. "But what has it to do with me?" she said to herself, and
she began asking her husband how Seryozha had got on without her.
"Oh, capitally! Mariee says he has been very good, And … I must disappoint you … but he has not missed you as your husband has. But once more merci,
my dear, for giving me a day. Our dear Samovar will be delighted." (He used to call
the Countess Lidia Ivanovna, well known in society, a samovar, because she was
always bubbling over with excitement.) "She has been continually asking aer
you. And, do you know, if I may venture to advise you, you should go and see her
today. You know how she takes everything to heart. Just now, with all her own
cares, she’s anxious about the Oblonskys being brought together."
e Countess Lidia Ivanovna was a friend of her husband’s, and the center
of that one of the coteries of the Petersburg world with which Anna was, through
her husband, in the closest relations.
"But you know I wrote to her?"
"Still she’ll want to hear details. Go and see her, if you’re not too tired, my
dear. Well, Kondraty will take you in the carriage, while I go to my commiee. I
shall not be alone at dinner again," Alexey Alexandrovitch went on, no longer in a
sarcastic tone. "You wouldn’t believe how I’ve missed…" And with a long pressure
of her hand and a meaning smile, he put her in her carriage.

Chapter 
e ﬁrst person to meet Anna at home was her son. He dashed down the stairs
to her, in spite of the governess’s call, and with desperate joy shrieked: "Mother!
mother!" Running up to her, he hung on her neck.
"I told you it was mother!" he shouted to the governess. "I knew!"
And her son, like her husband, aroused in Anna a feeling akin to disappointment. She had imagined him beer than he was in reality. She had to let herself
drop down to the reality to enjoy him as he really was. But even as he was, he
was charming, with his fair curls, his blue eyes, and his plump, graceful lile legs
in tightly pulled-up stockings. Anna experienced almost physical pleasure in the
sensation of his nearness, and his caresses, and moral soothing, when she met his
simple, conﬁding, and loving glance, and heard his naïve questions. Anna took
out the presents Dolly’s children had sent him, and told her son what sort of lile
girl was Tanya at Moscow, and how Tanya could read, and even taught the other

xcix
children.
"Why, am I not so nice as she?" asked Seryozha.
"To me you’re nicer than anyone in the world."
"I know that," said Seryozha, smiling.
Anna had not had time to drink her coﬀee when the Countess Lidia
Ivanovna was announced. e Countess Lidia Ivanovna was a tall, stout woman,
with an unhealthily sallow face and splendid, pensive black eyes. Anna liked her,
but today she seemed to be seeing her for the ﬁrst time with all her defects.
"Well, my dear, so you took the olive branch?" inquired Countess Lidia
Ivanovna, as soon as she came into the room.
"Yes, it’s all over, but it was all much less serious than we had supposed,"
answered Anna. "My belle-soeur is in general too hasty."
But Countess Lidia Ivanovna, though she was interested in everything that
did not concern her, had a habit of never listening to what interested her; she
interrupted Anna:
"Yes, there’s plenty of sorrow and evil in the world. I am so worried today."
"Oh, why?" asked Anna, trying to suppress a smile.
"I’m beginning to be weary of fruitlessly championing the truth, and sometimes I’m quite unhinged by it. e Society of the Lile Sisters" (this was a
religiously-patriotic, philanthropic institution) "was going splendidly, but with
these gentlemen it’s impossible to do anything," added Countess Lidia Ivanovna
in a tone of ironical submission to destiny. "ey pounce on the idea, and distort
it, and then work it out so peily and unworthily. Two or three people, your
husband among them, understand all the importance of the thing, but the others
simply drag it down. Yesterday Pravdin wrote to me…"
Pravdin was a well-known Panslavist abroad, and Countess Lidia Ivanovna
described the purport of his leer.
en the countess told her of more disagreements and intrigues against the
work of the uniﬁcation of the churches, and departed in haste, as she had that day
to be at the meeting of some society and also at the Slavonic commiee.
"It was all the same before, of course; but why was it I didn’t notice it before?" Anna asked herself. "Or has she been very much irritated today? It’s really
ludicrous; her object is doing good; she a Christian, yet she’s always angry; and
she always has enemies, and always enemies in the name of Christianity and doing good."
Aer Countess Lidia Ivanovna another friend came, the wife of a chief secretary, who told her all the news of the town. At three o’clock she too went away,
promising to come to dinner. Alexey Alexandrovitch was at the ministry. Anna,
le alone, spent the time till dinner in assisting at her son’s dinner (he dined apart
from his parents) and in puing her things in order, and in reading and answering

c
the notes and leers which had accumulated on her table.
e feeling of causeless shame, which she had felt on the journey, and her
excitement, too, had completely vanished. In the habitual conditions of her life
she felt again resolute and irreproachable.
She recalled with wonder her state of mind on the previous day. "What was
it? Nothing. Vronsky said something silly, which it was easy to put a stop to,
and I answered as I ought to have done. To speak of it to my husband would be
unnecessary and out of the question. To speak of it would be to aach importance
to what has no importance." She remembered how she had told her husband of
what was almost a declaration made her at Petersburg by a young man, one of her
husband’s subordinates, and how Alexey Alexandrovitch had answered that every
woman living in the world was exposed to such incidents, but that he had the
fullest conﬁdence in her tact, and could never lower her and himself by jealousy.
"So then there’s no reason to speak of it? And indeed, thank God, there’s nothing
to speak of," she told herself.

Chapter 
Alexey Alexandrovitch came back from the meeting of the ministers at four
o’clock, but as oen happened, he had not time to come in to her. He went into
his study to see the people waiting for him with petitions, and to sign some papers brought him by his chief secretary. At dinner time (there were always a few
people dining with the Karenins) there arrived an old lady, a cousin of Alexey
Alexandrovitch, the chief secretary of the department and his wife, and a young
man who had been recommended to Alexey Alexandrovitch for the service. Anna
went into the drawing room to receive these guests. Precisely at ﬁve o’clock, before the bronze Peter the First clock had struck the ﬁh stroke, Alexey Alexandrovitch came in, wearing a white tie and evening coat with two stars, as he had
to go out directly aer dinner. Every minute of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s life was
portioned out and occupied. And to make time to get through all that lay before
him every day, he adhered to the strictest punctuality. "Unhasting and unresting,"
was his moo. He came into the dining hall, greeted everyone, and hurriedly sat
down, smiling to his wife.
"Yes, my solitude is over. You wouldn’t believe how uncomfortable" (he laid
stress on the word uncomfortable) "it is to dine alone."
At dinner he talked a lile to his wife about Moscow maers, and, with a
sarcastic smile, asked her aer Stepan Arkadyevitch; but the conversation was
for the most part general, dealing with Petersburg oﬃcial and public news. Aer
dinner he spent half an hour with his guests, and again, with a smile, pressed his

ci
wife’s hand, withdrew, and drove oﬀ to the council. Anna did not go out that
evening either to the Princess Betsy Tverskaya, who, hearing of her return, had
invited her, nor to the theater, where she had a box for that evening. She did
not go out principally because the dress she had reckoned upon was not ready.
Altogether, Anna, on turning, aer the departure of her guests, to the consideration of her aire, was very much annoyed. She was generally a mistress of the
art of dressing well without great expense, and before leaving Moscow she had
given her dressmaker three dresses to transform. e dresses had to be altered so
that they could not be recognized, and they ought to have been ready three days
before. It appeared that two dresses had not been done at all, while the other
one had not been altered as Anna had intended. e dressmaker came to explain,
declaring that it would be beer as she had done it, and Anna was so furious
that she felt ashamed when she thought of it aerwards. To regain her serenity
completely she went into the nursery, and spent the whole evening with her son,
put him to bed herself, signed him with the cross, and tucked him up. She was
glad she had not gone out anywhere, and had spent the evening so well. She felt
so light-hearted and serene, she saw so clearly that all that had seemed to her so
important on her railway journey was only one of the common trivial incidents
of fashionable life, and that she had no reason to feel ashamed before anyone else
or before herself. Anna sat down at the hearth with an English novel and waited
for her husband. Exactly at half-past nine she heard his ring, and he came into
the room.
"Here you are at last!" she observed, holding out her hand to him.
He kissed her hand and sat down beside her.
"Altogether then, I see your visit was a success," he said to her.
"Oh, yes," she said, and she began telling him about everything from the
beginning: her journey with Countess Vronskaya, her arrival, the accident at the
station. en she described the pity she had felt, ﬁrst for her brother, and aerwards for Dolly.
"I imagine one cannot exonerate such a man from blame, though he is your
brother," said Alexey Alexandrovitch severely.
Anna smiled. She knew that he said that simply to show that family considerations could not prevent him from expressing his genuine opinion. She knew
that characteristic in her husband, and liked it.
"I am glad it has all ended so satisfactorily, and that you are back again," he
went on. "Come, what do they say about the new act I have got passed in the
council?"
Anna had heard nothing of this act, and she felt conscience-stricken at having been able so readily to forget what was to him of such importance.
"Here, on the other hand, it has made a great sensation," he said, with a

cii
complacent smile.
She saw that Alexey Alexandrovitch wanted to tell her something pleasant
to him about it, and she brought him by questions to telling it. With the same
complacent smile he told her of the ovations he had received in consequence of
the act he had passed.
"I was very, very glad. It shows that at last a reasonable and steady view of
the maer is becoming prevalent among us."
Having drunk his second cup of tea with cream, and bread, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up, and was going towards his study.
"And you’ve not been anywhere this evening? You’ve been dull, I expect?"
he said.
"Oh, no!" she answered, geing up aer him and accompanying him across
the room to his study. "What are you reading now?" she asked.
"Just now I’m reading Duc de Lille, Poésie des Enfers," he answered. "A very
remarkable book."
Anna smiled, as people smile at the weaknesses of those they love, and,
puing her hand under his, she escorted him to the door of the study. She knew
his habit, that had grown into a necessity, of reading in the evening. She knew, too,
that in spite of his oﬃcial duties, which swallowed up almost the whole of his time,
he considered it his duty to keep up with everything of note that appeared in the
intellectual world. She knew, too, that he was really interested in books dealing
with politics, philosophy, and theology, that art was uerly foreign to his nature;
but, in spite of this, or rather, in consequence of it, Alexey Alexandrovitch never
passed over anything in the world of art, but made it his duty to read everything.
She knew that in politics, in philosophy, in theology, Alexey Alexandrovitch oen
had doubts, and made investigations; but on questions of art and poetry, and,
above all, of music, of which he was totally devoid of understanding, he had the
most distinct and decided opinions. He was fond of talking about Shakespeare,
Raphael, Beethoven, of the signiﬁcance of new schools of poetry and music, all of
which were classiﬁed by him with very conspicuous consistency.
"Well, God be with you," she said at the door of the study, where a shaded
candle and a decanter of water were already put by his armchair. "And I’ll write
to Moscow."
He pressed her hand, and again kissed it.
"All the same he’s a good man; truthful, good-hearted, and remarkable in
his own line," Anna said to herself going back to her room, as though she were
defending him to someone who had aacked him and said that one could not love
him. "But why is it his ears stick out so strangely? Or has he had his hair cut?"
Precisely at twelve o’clock, when Anna was still siing at her writing table,
ﬁnishing a leer to Dolly, she heard the sound of measured steps in slippers, and

ciii
Alexey Alexandrovitch, freshly washed and combed, with a book under his arm,
came in to her.
"It’s time, it’s time," said he, with a meaning smile, and he went into their
bedroom.
"And what right had he to look at him like that?" thought Anna, recalling
Vronsky’s glance at Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Undressing, she went into the bedroom; but her face had none of the eagerness which, during her stay in Moscow, had fairly ﬂashed from her eyes and her
smile; on the contrary, now the ﬁre seemed quenched in her, hidden somewhere
far away.

Chapter 
When Vronsky went to Moscow from Petersburg, he had le his large set of rooms
in Morskaia to his friend and favorite comrade Petritsky.
Petritsky was a young lieutenant, not particularly well-connected, and not
merely not wealthy, but always hopelessly in debt. Towards evening he was always drunk, and he had oen been locked up aer all sorts of ludicrous and disgraceful scandals, but he was a favorite both of his comrades and his superior
oﬃcers. On arriving at twelve o’clock from the station at his ﬂat, Vronsky saw,
at the outer door, a hired carriage familiar to him. While still outside his own
door, as he rang, he heard masculine laughter, the lisp of a feminine voice, and
Petritsky’s voice. "If that’s one of the villains, don’t let him in!" Vronsky told the
servant not to announce him, and slipped quietly into the ﬁrst room. Baroness
Shilton, a friend of Petritsky’s, with a rosy lile face and ﬂaxen hair, resplendent
in a lilac satin gown, and ﬁlling the whole room, like a canary, with her Parisian
chaer, sat at the round table making coﬀee. Petritsky, in his overcoat, and the
cavalry captain Kamerovsky, in full uniform, probably just come from duty, were
siing each side of her.
"Bravo! Vronsky!" shouted Petritsky, jumping up, scraping his chair. "Our
host himself! Baroness, some coﬀee for him out of the new coﬀee pot. Why, we
didn’t expect you! Hope you’re satisﬁed with the ornament of your study," he
said, indicating the baroness. "You know each other, of course?"
"I should think so," said Vronsky, with a bright smile, pressing the baroness’s
lile hand. "What next! I’m an old friend."
"You’re home aer a journey," said the baroness, "so I’m ﬂying. Oh, I’ll be
oﬀ this minute, if I’m in the way."
"You’re home, wherever you are, baroness," said Vronsky. "How do you do,
Kamerovsky?" he added, coldly shaking hands with Kamerovsky.

civ
"ere, you never know how to say such prey things," said the baroness,
turning to Petritsky.
"No; what’s that for? Aer dinner I say things quite as good."
"Aer dinner there’s no credit in them? Well, then, I’ll make you some
coﬀee, so go and wash and get ready," said the baroness, siing down again, and
anxiously turning the screw in the new coﬀee pot. "Pierre, give me the coﬀee," she
said, addressing Petritsky, whom she called Pierre as a contraction of his surname,
making no secret of her relations with him. "I’ll put it in."
"You’ll spoil it!"
"No, I won’t spoil it! Well, and your wife?" said the baroness suddenly,
interrupting Vronsky’s conversation with his comrade. "We’ve been marrying
you here. Have you brought your wife?"
"No, baroness. I was born a Bohemian, and a Bohemian I shall die."
"So much the beer, so much the beer. Shake hands on it."
And the baroness, detaining Vronsky, began telling him, with many jokes,
about her last new plans of life, asking his advice.
"He persists in refusing to give me a divorce! Well, what am I to do?" (He
was her husband.) "Now I want to begin a suit against him. What do you advise?
Kamerovsky, look aer the coﬀee; it’s boiling over. You see, I’m engrossed with
business! I want a lawsuit, because I must have my property. Do you understand the folly of it, that on the pretext of my being unfaithful to him," she said
contemptuously, "he wants to get the beneﬁt of my fortune."
Vronsky heard with pleasure this light-hearted prale of a prey woman,
agreed with her, gave her half-joking counsel, and altogether dropped at once
into the tone habitual to him in talking to such women. In his Petersburg world
all people were divided into uerly opposed classes. One, the lower class, vulgar,
stupid, and, above all, ridiculous people, who believe that one husband ought
to live with the one wife whom he has lawfully married; that a girl should be
innocent, a woman modest, and a man manly, self-controlled, and strong; that
one ought to bring up one’s children, earn one’s bread, and pay one’s debts; and
various similar absurdities. is was the class of old-fashioned and ridiculous
people. But there was another class of people, the real people. To this class they
all belonged, and in it the great thing was to be elegant, generous, plucky, gay,
to abandon oneself without a blush to every passion, and to laugh at everything
else.
For the ﬁrst moment only, Vronsky was startled aer the impression of a
quite diﬀerent world that he had brought with him from Moscow. But immediately as though slipping his feet into old slippers, he dropped back into the
light-hearted, pleasant world he had always lived in.
e coﬀee was never really made, but spluered over every one, and boiled

cv
away, doing just what was required of it—that is, providing much cause for much
noise and laughter, and spoiling a costly rug and the baroness’s gown.
"Well now, good-bye, or you’ll never get washed, and I shall have on my
conscience the worst sin a gentleman can commit. So you would advise a knife
to his throat?"
"To be sure, and manage that your hand may not be far from his lips. He’ll
kiss your hand, and all will end satisfactorily," answered Vronsky.
"So at the Francais!" and, with a rustle of her skirts, she vanished.
Kamerovsky got up too, and Vronsky, not waiting for him to go, shook hands
and went oﬀ to his dressing room.
While he was washing, Petritsky described to him in brief outlines his position, as far as it had changed since Vronsky had le Petersburg. No money at
all. His father said he wouldn’t give him any and pay his debts. His tailor was
trying to get him locked up, and another fellow, too, was threatening to get him
locked up. e colonel of the regiment had announced that if these scandals did
not cease he would have to leave. As for the baroness, he was sick to death of
her, especially since she’d taken to oﬀering continually to lend him money. But
he had found a girl—he’d show her to Vronsky—a marvel, exquisite, in the strict
Oriental style, "genre of the slave Rebecca, don’t you know." He’d had a row, too,
with Berkoshov, and was going to send seconds to him, but of course it would
come to nothing. Altogether everything was supremely amusing and jolly. And,
not leing his comrade enter into further details of his position, Petritsky proceeded to tell him all the interesting news. As he listened to Petritsky’s familiar
stories in the familiar seing of the rooms he had spent the last three years in,
Vronsky felt a delightful sense of coming back to the careless Petersburg life that
he was used to.
"Impossible!" he cried, leing down the pedal of the washing basin in which
he had been sousing his healthy red neck. "Impossible!" he cried, at the news that
Laura had ﬂung over Fertinghof and had made up to Mileev. "And is he as stupid
and pleased as ever? Well, and how’s Buzulukov?"
"Oh, there is a tale about Buzulukov—simply lovely!" cried Petritsky. "You
know his weakness for balls, and he never misses a single court ball. He went to
a big ball in a new helmet. Have you seen the new helmets? Very nice, lighter.
Well, so he’s standing…. No, I say, do listen."
"I am listening," answered Vronsky, rubbing himself with a rough towel.
"Up comes the Grand Duchess with some ambassador or other, and, as illluck would have it, she begins talking to him about the new helmets. e Grand
Duchess positively wanted to show the new helmet to the ambassador. ey see
our friend standing there." (Petritsky mimicked how he was standing with the
helmet.) "e Grand Duchess asked him to give her the helmet; he doesn’t give

it to her. What do you think of that? Well, every one’s winking at him, nodding,
frowning—give it to her, do! He doesn’t give it to her. He’s mute as a ﬁsh. Only
picture it!… Well, the … what’s his name, whatever he was … tries to take the
helmet from him … he won’t give it up!… He pulls it from him, and hands it
to the Grand Duchess. ‘Here, your Highness,’ says he, ‘is the new helmet.’ She
turned the helmet the other side up, And—just picture it!—plop went a pear and
sweetmeats out of it, two pounds of sweetmeats!… He’d been storing them up,
the darling!"
Vronsky burst into roars of laughter. And long aerwards, when he was
talking of other things, he broke out into his healthy laugh, showing his strong,
close rows of teeth, when he thought of the helmet.
Having heard all the news, Vronsky, with the assistance of his valet, got
into his uniform, and went oﬀ to report himself. He intended, when he had done
that, to drive to his brother’s and to Betsy’s and to pay several visits with a view
to beginning to go into that society where he might meet Madame Karenina. As
he always did in Petersburg, he le home not meaning to return till late at night.

PART TWO
Chapter 
At the end of the winter, in the Shtcherbatskys’ house, a consultation was being
held, which was to pronounce on the state of Kiy’s health and the measures to
be taken to restore her failing strength. She had been ill, and as spring came on
she grew worse. e family doctor gave her cod liver oil, then iron, then nitrate
of silver, but as the ﬁrst and the second and the third were alike in doing no good,
and as his advice when spring came was to go abroad, a celebrated physician was
called in. e celebrated physician, a very handsome man, still youngish, asked
to examine the patient. He maintained, with peculiar satisfaction, it seemed, that
maiden modesty is a mere relic of barbarism, and that nothing could be more
natural than for a man still youngish to handle a young girl naked. He thought it
natural because he did it every day, and felt and thought, as it seemed to him, no

cvii
harm as he did it and consequently he considered modesty in the girl not merely
as a relic of barbarism, but also as an insult to himself.
ere was nothing for it but to submit, since, although all the doctors had
studied in the same school, had read the same books, and learned the same science, and though some people said this celebrated doctor was a bad doctor, in
the princess’s household and circle it was for some reason accepted that this celebrated doctor alone had some special knowledge, and that he alone could save
Kiy. Aer a careful examination and sounding of the bewildered patient, dazed
with shame, the celebrated doctor, having scrupulously washed his hands, was
standing in the drawing room talking to the prince. e prince frowned and
coughed, listening to the doctor. As a man who had seen something of life, and
neither a fool nor an invalid, he had no faith in medicine, and in his heart was
furious at the whole farce, specially as he was perhaps the only one who fully
comprehended the cause of Kiy’s illness. "Conceited blockhead!" he thought, as
he listened to the celebrated doctor’s chaer about his daughter’s symptoms. e
doctor was meantime with diﬃculty restraining the expression of his contempt
for this old gentleman, and with diﬃculty condescending to the level of his intelligence. He perceived that it was no good talking to the old man, and that the
principal person in the house was the mother. Before her he decided to scaer his
pearls. At that instant the princess came into the drawing room with the family
doctor. e prince withdrew, trying not to show how ridiculous he thought the
whole performance. e princess was distracted, and did not know what to do.
She felt she had sinned against Kiy.
"Well, doctor, decide our fate," said the princess. "Tell me everything."
"Is there hope?" she meant to say, but her lips quivered, and she could not
uer the question. "Well, doctor?"
"Immediately, princess. I will talk it over with my colleague, and then I will
have the honor of laying my opinion before you."
"So we had beer leave you?"
"As you please."
e princess went out with a sigh.
When the doctors were le alone, the family doctor began timidly explaining his opinion, that there was a commencement of tuberculous trouble, but …
and so on. e celebrated doctor listened to him, and in the middle of his sentence looked at his big gold watch.
"Yes," said he. "But…"
e family doctor respectfully ceased in the middle of his observations.
"e commencement of the tuberculous process we are not, as you are
aware, able to deﬁne; till there are cavities, there is nothing deﬁnite. But we
may suspect it. And there are indications; malnutrition, nervous excitability, and

cviii
so on. e question stands thus: in presence of indications of tuberculous process,
what is to be done to maintain nutrition?"
"But, you know, there are always moral, spiritual causes at the back in these
cases," the family doctor permied himself to interpolate with a subtle smile.
"Yes, that’s an understood thing," responded the celebrated physician, again
glancing at his watch. "Beg pardon, is the Yausky bridge done yet, or shall I have
to drive around?" he asked. "Ah! it is. Oh, well, then I can do it in twenty minutes.
So we were saying the problem may be put thus: to maintain nutrition and to give
tone to the nerves. e one is in close connection with the other, one must aack
both sides at once."
"And how about a tour abroad?" asked the family doctor.
"I’ve no liking for foreign tours. And take note: if there is an early stage
of tuberculous process, of which we cannot be certain, a foreign tour will be of
no use. What is wanted is means of improving nutrition, and not for lowering it."
And the celebrated doctor expounded his plan of treatment with Soden waters, a
remedy obviously prescribed primarily on the ground that they could do no harm.
e family doctor listened aentively and respectfully.
"But in favor of foreign travel I would urge the change of habits, the removal
from conditions calling up reminiscences. And then the mother wishes it," he
added.
"Ah! Well, in that case, to be sure, let them go. Only, those German quacks
are mischievous…. ey ought to be persuaded…. Well, let them go then."
He glanced once more at his watch.
"Oh! time’s up already," And he went to the door. e celebrated doctor
announced to the princess (a feeling of what was due from him dictated his doing
so) that he ought to see the patient once more.
"What! another examination!" cried the mother, with horror.
"Oh, no, only a few details, princess."
"Come this way."
And the mother, accompanied by the doctor, went into the drawing room
to Kiy. Wasted and ﬂushed, with a peculiar glier in her eyes, le there by the
agony of shame she had been put through, Kiy stood in the middle of the room.
When the doctor came in she ﬂushed crimson, and her eyes ﬁlled with tears. All
her illness and treatment struck her as a thing so stupid, ludicrous even! Doctoring
her seemed to her as absurd as puing together the pieces of a broken vase. Her
heart was broken. Why would they try to cure her with pills and powders? But
she could not grieve her mother, especially as her mother considered herself to
blame.
"May I trouble you to sit down, princess?" the celebrated doctor said to her.
He sat down with a smile, facing her, felt her pulse, and again began asking

cix
her tiresome questions. She answered him, and all at once got up, furious.
"Excuse me, doctor, but there is really no object in this. is is the third time
you’ve asked me the same thing."
e celebrated doctor did not take oﬀense.
"Nervous irritability," he said to the princess, when Kiy had le the room.
"However, I had ﬁnished…"
And the doctor began scientiﬁcally explaining to the princess, as an exceptionally intelligent woman, the condition of the young princess, and concluded
by insisting on the drinking of the waters, which were certainly harmless. At the
question: Should they go abroad? the doctor plunged into deep meditation, as
though resolving a weighty problem. Finally his decision was pronounced: they
were to go abroad, but to put no faith in foreign quacks, and to apply to him in
any need.
It seemed as though some piece of good fortune had come to pass aer the
doctor had gone. e mother was much more cheerful when she went back to her
daughter, and Kiy pretended to be more cheerful. She had oen, almost always,
to be pretending now.
"Really, I’m quite well, mamma. But if you want to go abroad, let’s go!" she
said, and trying to appear interested in the proposed tour, she began talking of
the preparations for the journey.

Chapter 
Soon aer the doctor, Dolly had arrived. She knew that there was to be a consultation that day, and though she was only just up aer her conﬁnement (she had
another baby, a lile girl, born at the end of the winter), though she had trouble
and anxiety enough of her own, she had le her tiny baby and a sick child, to
come and hear Kiy’s fate, which was to be decided that day.
"Well, well?" she said, coming into the drawing room, without taking oﬀ
her hat. "You’re all in good spirits. Good news, then?"
ey tried to tell her what the doctor had said, but it appeared that though
the doctor had talked distinctly enough and at great length, it was uerly impossible to report what he had said. e only point of interest was that it was seled
they should go abroad.
Dolly could not help sighing. Her dearest friend, her sister, was going away.
And her life was not a cheerful one. Her relations with Stepan Arkadyevitch after their reconciliation had become humiliating. e union Anna had cemented
turned out to be of no solid character, and family harmony was breaking down
again at the same point. ere had been nothing deﬁnite, but Stepan Arkadye-

cx
vitch was hardly ever at home; money, too, was hardly ever forthcoming, and
Dolly was continually tortured by suspicions of inﬁdelity, which she tried to dismiss, dreading the agonies of jealousy she had been through already. e ﬁrst
onslaught of jealousy, once lived through, could never come back again, and even
the discovery of inﬁdelities could never now aﬀect her as it had the ﬁrst time.
Such a discovery now would only mean breaking up family habits, and she let
herself be deceived, despising him and still more herself, for the weakness. Besides this, the care of her large family was a constant worry to her: ﬁrst, the
nursing of her young baby did not go well, then the nurse had gone away, now
one of the children had fallen ill.
"Well, how are all of you?" asked her mother.
"Ah, mamma, we have plenty of troubles of our own. Lili is ill, and I’m
afraid it’s scarlatina. I have come here now to hear about Kiy, and then I shall
shut myself up entirely, if—God forbid—it should be scarlatina."
e old prince too had come in from his study aer the doctor’s departure,
and aer presenting his cheek to Dolly, and saying a few words to her, he turned
to his wife:
"How have you seled it? you’re going? Well, and what do you mean to do
with me?"
"I suppose you had beer stay here, Alexander," said his wife.
"at’s as you like."
"Mamma, why shouldn’t father come with us?" said Kiy. "It would be nicer
for him and for us too."
e old prince got up and stroked Kiy’s hair. She lied her head and looked
at him with a forced smile. It always seemed to her that he understood her beer
than anyone in the family, though he did not say much about her. Being the
youngest, she was her father’s favorite, and she fancied that his love gave him
insight. When now her glance met his blue kindly eyes looking intently at her, it
seemed to her that he saw right through her, and understood all that was not good
that was passing within her. Reddening, she stretched out towards him expecting
a kiss, but he only paed her hair and said:
"ese stupid chignons! ere’s no geing at the real daughter. One simply
strokes the bristles of dead women. Well, Dolinka," he turned to his elder daughter,
"what’s your young buck about, hey?"
"Nothing, father," answered Dolly, understanding that her husband was
meant. "He’s always out; I scarcely ever see him," she could not resist adding
with a sarcastic smile.
"Why, hasn’t he gone into the country yet—to see about selling that forest?"
"No, he’s still geing ready for the journey."
"Oh, that’s it!" said the prince. "And so am I to be geing ready for a journey

cxi
too? At your service," he said to his wife, siing down. "And I tell you what, Katia,"
he went on to his younger daughter, "you must wake up one ﬁne day and say to
yourself: Why, I’m quite well, and merry, and going out again with father for an
early morning walk in the frost. Hey?"
What her father said seemed simple enough, yet at these words Kiy became confused and overcome like a detected criminal. "Yes, he sees it all, he understands it all, and in these words he’s telling me that though I’m ashamed, I
must get over my shame." She could not pluck up spirit to make any answer. She
tried to begin, and all at once burst into tears, and rushed out of the room.
"See what comes of your jokes!" the princess pounced down on her husband.
"You’re always…" she began a string of reproaches.
e prince listened to the princess’s scolding rather a long while without
speaking, but his face was more and more frowning.
"She’s so much to be pitied, poor child, so much to be pitied, and you don’t
feel how it hurts her to hear the slightest reference to the cause of it. Ah! to be so
mistaken in people!" said the princess, and by the change in her tone both Dolly
and the prince knew she was speaking of Vronsky. "I don’t know why there aren’t
laws against such base, dishonorable people."
"Ah, I can’t bear to hear you!" said the prince gloomily, geing up from his
low chair, and seeming anxious to get away, yet stopping in the doorway. "ere
are laws, madam, and since you’ve challenged me to it, I’ll tell you who’s to blame
for it all: you and you, you and nobody else. Laws against such young gallants
there have always been, and there still are! Yes, if there has been nothing that
ought not to have been, old as I am, I’d have called him out to the barrier, the
young dandy. Yes, and now you physic her and call in these quacks."
e prince apparently had plenty more to say, but as soon as the princess
heard his tone she subsided at once, and became penitent, as she always did on
serious occasions.
"Alexander, Alexander," she whispered, moving to him and beginning to
weep.
As soon as she began to cry the prince too calmed down. He went up to
her.
"ere, that’s enough, that’s enough! You’re wretched too, I know. It can’t
be helped. ere’s no great harm done. God is merciful … thanks…" he said, not
knowing what he was saying, as he responded to the tearful kiss of the princess
that he felt on his hand. And the prince went out of the room.
Before this, as soon as Kiy went out of the room in tears, Dolly, with her
motherly, family instincts, had promptly perceived that here a woman’s work lay
before her, and she prepared to do it. She took oﬀ her hat, and, morally speaking,
tucked up her sleeves and prepared for action. While her mother was aacking

cxii
her father, she tried to restrain her mother, so far as ﬁlial reverence would allow.
During the prince’s outburst she was silent; she felt ashamed for her mother, and
tender towards her father for so quickly being kind again. But when her father
le them she made ready for what was the chief thing needful—to go to Kiy and
console her.
"I’d been meaning to tell you something for a long while, mamma: did you
know that Levin meant to make Kiy an oﬀer when he was here the last time?
He told Stiva so."
"Well, what then? I don’t understand…"
"So did Kiy perhaps refuse him?… She didn’t tell you so?"
"No, she has said nothing to me either of one or the other; she’s too proud.
But I know it’s all on account of the other."
"Yes, but suppose she has refused Levin, and she wouldn’t have refused him
if it hadn’t been for the other, I know. And then, he has deceived her so horribly."
It was too terrible for the princess to think how she had sinned against her
daughter, and she broke out angrily.
"Oh, I really don’t understand! Nowadays they will all go their own way,
and mothers haven’t a word to say in anything, and then…"
"Mamma, I’ll go up to her."
"Well, do. Did I tell you not to?" said her mother.

Chapter 
When she went into Kiy’s lile room, a prey, pink lile room, full of knickknacks in vieux saxe, as fresh, and pink, and white, and gay as Kiy herself had
been two months ago, Dolly remembered how they had decorated the room the
year before together, with what love and gaiety. Her heart turned cold when she
saw Kiy siing on a low chair near the door, her eyes ﬁxed immovably on a
corner of the rug. Kiy glanced at her sister, and the cold, rather ill-tempered
expression of her face did not change.
"I’m just going now, and I shall have to keep in and you won’t be able to
come to see me," said Dolly, siing down beside her. "I want to talk to you."
"What about?" Kiy asked swily, liing her head in dismay.
"What should it be, but your trouble?"
"I have no trouble."
"Nonsense, Kiy. Do you suppose I could help knowing? I know all about
it. And believe me, it’s of so lile consequence…. We’ve all been through it."
Kiy did not speak, and her face had a stern expression.
"He’s not worth your grieving over him," pursued Darya Alexandrovna,

cxiii
coming straight to the point.
"No, because he has treated me with contempt," said Kiy, in a breaking
voice. "Don’t talk of it! Please, don’t talk of it!"
"But who can have told you so? No one has said that. I’m certain he was in
love with you, and would still be in love with you, if it hadn’t…
"Oh, the most awful thing of all for me is this sympathizing!" shrieked Kiy,
suddenly ﬂying into a passion. She turned round on her chair, ﬂushed crimson,
and rapidly moving her ﬁngers, pinched the clasp of her belt ﬁrst with one hand
and then with the other. Dolly knew this trick her sister had of clenching her
hands when she was much excited; she knew, too, that in moments of excitement
Kiy was capable of forgeing herself and saying a great deal too much, and Dolly
would have soothed her, but it was too late.
"What, what is it you want to make me feel, eh?" said Kiy quickly. "at
I’ve been in love with a man who didn’t care a straw for me, and that I’m dying
of love for him? And this is said to me by my own sister, who imagines that …
that … that she’s sympathizing with me!… I don’t want these condolences and
humbug!"
"Kiy, you’re unjust."
"Why are you tormenting me?"
"But I … quite the contrary … I see you’re unhappy…"
But Kiy in her fury did not hear her.
"I’ve nothing to grieve over and be comforted about. I am too proud ever to
allow myself to care for a man who does not love me."
"Yes, I don’t say so either…. Only one thing. Tell me the truth," said Darya
Alexandrovna, taking her by the hand: "tell me, did Levin speak to you?…"
e mention of Levin’s name seemed to deprive Kiy of the last vestige of
self-control. She leaped up from her chair, and ﬂinging her clasp on the ground,
she gesticulated rapidly with her hands and said:
"Why bring Levin in too? I can’t understand what you want to torment
me for. I’ve told you, and I say it again, that I have some pride, and never, never
would I do as you’re doing—go back to a man who’s deceived you, who has cared
for another woman. I can’t understand it! You may, but I can’t!"
And saying these words she glanced at her sister, and seeing that Dolly sat
silent, her head mournfully bowed, Kiy, instead of running out of the room as
she had meant to do, sat down near the door, and hid her face in her handkerchief.
e silence lasted for two minutes: Dolly was thinking of herself. at
humiliation of which she was always conscious came back to her with a peculiar
bierness when her sister reminded her of it. She had not looked for such cruelty
in her sister, and she was angry with her. But suddenly she heard the rustle of
a skirt, and with it the sound of heart-rending, smothered sobbing, and felt arms

cxiv
about her neck. Kiy was on her knees before her.
"Dolinka, I am so, so wretched!" she whispered penitently. And the sweet
face covered with tears hid itself in Darya Alexandrovna’s skirt.
As though tears were the indispensable oil, without which the machinery
of mutual conﬁdence could not run smoothly between the two sisters, the sisters
aer their tears talked, not of what was uppermost in their minds, but, though
they talked of outside maers, they understood each other. Kiy knew that the
words she had uered in anger about her husband’s inﬁdelity and her humiliating
position had cut her poor sister to the heart, but that she had forgiven her. Dolly
for her part knew all she had wanted to ﬁnd out. She felt certain that her surmises
were correct; that Kiy’s misery, her inconsolable misery, was due precisely to the
fact that Levin had made her an oﬀer and she had refused him, and Vronsky had
deceived her, and that she was fully prepared to love Levin and to detest Vronsky.
Kiy said not a word of that; she talked of nothing but her spiritual condition.
"I have nothing to make me miserable," she said, geing calmer; "but can
you understand that everything has become hateful, loathsome, coarse to me,
and I myself most of all? You can’t imagine what loathsome thoughts I have
about everything."
"Why, whatever loathsome thoughts can you have?" asked Dolly, smiling.
"e most uerly loathsome and coarse: I can’t tell you. It’s not unhappiness, or low spirits, but much worse. As though everything that was good in me
was all hidden away, and nothing was le but the most loathsome. Come, how
am I to tell you?" she went on, seeing the puzzled look in her sister’s eyes. "Father
began saying something to me just now…. It seems to me he thinks all I want is
to be married. Mother takes me to a ball: it seems to me she only takes me to
get me married oﬀ as soon as may be, and be rid of me. I know it’s not the truth,
but I can’t drive away such thoughts. Eligible suitors, as they call them—I can’t
bear to see them. It seems to me they’re taking stock of me and summing me
up. In old days to go anywhere in a ball dress was a simple joy to me, I admired
myself; now I feel ashamed and awkward. And then! e doctor…. en…" Kiy
hesitated; she wanted to say further that ever since this change had taken place
in her, Stepan Arkadyevitch had become insuﬀerably repulsive to her, and that
she could not see him without the grossest and most hideous conceptions rising
before her imagination.
"Oh, well, everything presents itself to me, in the coarsest, most loathsome
light," she went on. "at’s my illness. Perhaps it will pass oﬀ."
"But you mustn’t think about it."
"I can’t help it. I’m never happy except with the children at your house."
"What a pity you can’t be with me!"
"Oh, yes, I’m coming. I’ve had scarlatina, and I’ll persuade mamma to let

cxv
me."
Kiy insisted on having her way, and went to stay at her sister’s and nursed
the children all through the scarlatina, for scarlatina it turned out to be. e two
sisters brought all the six children successfully through it, but Kiy was no beer
in health, and in Lent the Shtcherbatskys went abroad.

Chapter 
e highest Petersburg society is essentially one: in it everyone knows everyone
else, everyone even visits everyone else. But this great set has its subdivisions.
Anna Arkadyevna Karenina had friends and close ties in three diﬀerent circles
of this highest society. One circle was her husband’s government oﬃcial set,
consisting of his colleagues and subordinates, brought together in the most various and capricious manner, and belonging to diﬀerent social strata. Anna found
it diﬃcult now to recall the feeling of almost awe-stricken reverence which she
had at ﬁrst entertained for these persons. Now she knew all of them as people
know one another in a country town; she knew their habits and weaknesses, and
where the shoe pinched each one of them. She knew their relations with one another and with the head authorities, knew who was for whom, and how each one
maintained his position, and where they agreed and disagreed. But the circle of
political, masculine interests had never interested her, in spite of countess Lidia
Ivanovna’s inﬂuence, and she avoided it.
Another lile set with which Anna was in close relations was the one by
means of which Alexey Alexandrovitch had made his career. e center of this
circle was the Countess Lidia Ivanovna. It was a set made up of elderly, ugly,
benevolent, and godly women, and clever, learned, and ambitious men. One of
the clever people belonging to the set had called it "the conscience of Petersburg
society." Alexey Alexandrovitch had the highest esteem for this circle, and Anna
with her special gi for geing on with everyone, had in the early days of her life
in Petersburg made friends in this circle also. Now, since her return from Moscow,
she had come to feel this set insuﬀerable. It seemed to her that both she and all
of them were insincere, and she felt so bored and ill at ease in that world that she
went to see the Countess Lidia Ivanovna as lile as possible.
e third circle with which Anna had ties was preeminently the fashionable
world—the world of balls, of dinners, of sumptuous dresses, the world that hung
on to the court with one hand, so as to avoid sinking to the level of the demimonde. For the demi-monde the members of that fashionable world believed that
they despised, though their tastes were not merely similar, but in fact identical.
Her connection with this circle was kept up through Princess Betsy Tverskaya,

cxvi
her cousin’s wife, who had an income of a hundred and twenty thousand roubles, and who had taken a great fancy to Anna ever since she ﬁrst came out,
showed her much aention, and drew her into her set, making fun of Countess
Lidia Ivanovna’s coterie.
"When I’m old and ugly I’ll be the same," Betsy used to say; "but for a prey
young woman like you it’s early days for that house of charity."
Anna had at ﬁrst avoided as far as she could Princess Tverskaya’s world, because it necessitated an expenditure beyond her means, and besides in her heart
she preferred the ﬁrst circle. But since her visit to Moscow she had done quite
the contrary. She avoided her serious-minded friends, and went out into the fashionable world. ere she met Vronsky, and experienced an agitating joy at those
meetings. She met Vronsky specially oen at Betsy’s for Betsy was a Vronsky
by birth and his cousin. Vronsky was everywhere where he had any chance of
meeting Anna, and speaking to her, when he could, of his love. She gave him
no encouragement, but every time she met him there surged up in her heart that
same feeling of quickened life that had come upon her that day in the railway
carriage when she saw him for the ﬁrst time. She was conscious herself that her
delight sparkled in her eyes and curved her lips into a smile, and she could not
quench the expression of this delight.
At ﬁrst Anna sincerely believed that she was displeased with him for daring
to pursue her. Soon aer her return from Moscow, on arriving at a soirée where
she had expected to meet him, and not ﬁnding him there, she realized distinctly
from the rush of disappointment that she had been deceiving herself, and that this
pursuit was not merely not distasteful to her, but that it made the whole interest
of her life.
A celebrated singer was singing for the second time, and all the fashionable
world was in the theater. Vronsky, seeing his cousin from his stall in the front
row, did not wait till the entr’acte, but went to her box.
"Why didn’t you come to dinner?" she said to him. "I marvel at the second
sight of lovers," she added with a smile, so that no one but he could hear; "she
wasn’t there. But come aer the opera."
Vronsky looked inquiringly at her. She nodded. He thanked her by a smile,
and sat down beside her.
"But how I remember your jeers!" continued Princess Betsy, who took a peculiar pleasure in following up this passion to a successful issue. "What’s become
of all that? You’re caught, my dear boy."
"at’s my one desire, to be caught," answered Vronsky, with his serene,
good-humored smile. "If I complain of anything it’s only that I’m not caught
enough, to tell the truth. I begin to lose hope."
"Why, whatever hope can you have?" said Betsy, oﬀended on behalf of her

cxvii
friend. "Entendons nous…." But in her eyes there were gleams of light that betrayed
that she understood perfectly and precisely as he did what hope he might have.
"None whatever," said Vronsky, laughing and showing his even rows of
teeth. "Excuse me," he added, taking an opera glass out of her hand, and proceeding to scrutinize, over her bare shoulder, the row of boxes facing them. "I’m
afraid I’m becoming ridiculous."
He was very well aware that he ran no risk of being ridiculous in the eyes of
Betsy or any other fashionable people. He was very well aware that in their eyes
the position of an unsuccessful lover of a girl, or of any woman free to marry,
might be ridiculous. But the position of a man pursuing a married woman, and,
regardless of everything, staking his life on drawing her into adultery, has something ﬁne and grand about it, and can never be ridiculous; and so it was with a
proud and gay smile under his mustaches that he lowered the opera glass and
looked at his cousin.
"But why was it you didn’t come to dinner?" she said, admiring him.
"I must tell you about that. I was busily employed, and doing what, do you
suppose? I’ll give you a hundred guesses, a thousand … you’d never guess. I’ve
been reconciling a husband with a man who’d insulted his wife. Yes, really!"
"Well, did you succeed?"
"Almost."
"You really must tell me about it," she said, geing up. "Come to me in the
next entr’acte."
"I can’t; I’m going to the French theater."
"From Nilsson?" Betsy queried in horror, though she could not herself have
distinguished Nilsson’s voice from any chorus girl’s.
"Can’t help it. I’ve an appointment there, all to do with my mission of peace."
"‘Blessed are the peacemakers; theirs is the kingdom of heaven,’" said Betsy,
vaguely recollecting she had heard some similar saying from someone. "Very
well, then, sit down, and tell me what it’s all about."
And she sat down again.

Chapter 
"is is rather indiscreet, but it’s so good it’s an awful temptation to tell the story,"
said Vronsky, looking at her with his laughing eyes. "I’m not going to mention
any names."
"But I shall guess, so much the beer."
"Well, listen: two festive young men were driving—"
"Oﬃcers of your regiment, of course?"

cxviii
"I didn’t say they were oﬃcers,—two young men who had been lunching."
"In other words, drinking."
"Possibly. ey were driving on their way to dinner with a friend in the
most festive state of mind. And they beheld a prey woman in a hired sledge;
she overtakes them, looks round at them, and, so they fancy anyway, nods to
them and laughs. ey, of course, follow her. ey gallop at full speed. To their
amazement, the fair one alights at the entrance of the very house to which they
were going. e fair one darts upstairs to the top story. ey get a glimpse of red
lips under a short veil, and exquisite lile feet."
"You describe it with such feeling that I fancy you must be one of the two."
"And aer what you said, just now! Well, the young men go in to their
comrade’s; he was giving a farewell dinner. ere they certainly did drink a lile
too much, as one always does at farewell dinners. And at dinner they inquire who
lives at the top in that house. No one knows; only their host’s valet, in answer
to their inquiry whether any ‘young ladies’ are living on the top ﬂoor, answered
that there were a great many of them about there. Aer dinner the two young
men go into their host’s study, and write a leer to the unknown fair one. ey
compose an ardent epistle, a declaration in fact, and they carry the leer upstairs
themselves, so as to elucidate whatever might appear not perfectly intelligible in
the leer."
"Why are you telling me these horrible stories? Well?"
"ey ring. A maid-servant opens the door, they hand her the leer, and
assure the maid that they’re both so in love that they’ll die on the spot at the
door. e maid, stupeﬁed, carries in their messages. All at once a gentleman
appears with whiskers like sausages, as red as a lobster, announces that there is
no one living in the ﬂat except his wife, and sends them both about their business."
"How do you know he had whiskers like sausages, as you say?"
"Ah, you shall hear. I’ve just been to make peace between them."
"Well, and what then?"
"at’s the most interesting part of the story. It appears that it’s a happy
couple, a government clerk and his lady. e government clerk lodges a complaint,
and I became a mediator, and such a mediator!… I assure you Talleyrand couldn’t
hold a candle to me."
"Why, where was the diﬃculty?"
"Ah, you shall hear…. We apologize in due form: we are in despair, we
entreat forgiveness for the unfortunate misunderstanding. e government clerk
with the sausages begins to melt, but he, too, desires to express his sentiments,
and as soon as ever he begins to express them, he begins to get hot and say nasty
things, and again I’m obliged to trot out all my diplomatic talents. I allowed that
their conduct was bad, but I urged him to take into consideration their heedless-

cxix
ness, their youth; then, too, the young men had only just been lunching together.
‘You understand. ey regret it deeply, and beg you to overlook their misbehavior.’ e government clerk was soened once more. ‘I consent, count, and
am ready to overlook it; but you perceive that my wife—my wife’s a respectable
woman—has been exposed to the persecution, and insults, and eﬀrontery of young
upstarts, scoundrels….’ And you must understand, the young upstarts are present
all the while, and I have to keep the peace between them. Again I call out all
my diplomacy, and again as soon as the thing was about at an end, our friend the
government clerk gets hot and red, and his sausages stand on end with wrath, and
once more I launch out into diplomatic wiles."
"Ah, he must tell you this story!" said Betsy, laughing, to a lady who came
into her box. "He has been making me laugh so."
"Well, bonne ance!" she added, giving Vronsky one ﬁnger of the hand in
which she held her fan, and with a shrug of her shoulders she twitched down
the bodice of her gown that had worked up, so as to be duly naked as she moved
forward towards the footlights into the light of the gas, and the sight of all eyes.
Vronsky drove to the French theater, where he really had to see the colonel
of his regiment, who never missed a single performance there. He wanted to see
him, to report on the result of his mediation, which had occupied and amused
him for the last three days. Petritsky, whom he liked, was implicated in the aﬀair,
and the other culprit was a capital fellow and ﬁrst-rate comrade, who had lately
joined the regiment, the young Prince Kedrov. And what was most important, the
interests of the regiment were involved in it too.
Both the young men were in Vronsky’s company. e colonel of the regiment was waited upon by the government clerk, Venden, with a complaint against
his oﬃcers, who had insulted his wife. His young wife, so Venden told the
story—he had been married half a year—was at church with her mother, and suddenly overcome by indisposition, arising from her interesting condition, she could
not remain standing, she drove home in the ﬁrst sledge, a smart-looking one, she
came across. On the spot the oﬃcers set oﬀ in pursuit of her; she was alarmed, and
feeling still more unwell, ran up the staircase home. Venden himself, on returning from his oﬃce, heard a ring at their bell and voices, went out, and seeing the
intoxicated oﬃcers with a leer, he had turned them out. He asked for exemplary
punishment.
"Yes, it’s all very well," said the colonel to Vronsky, whom he had invited to
come and see him. "Petritsky’s becoming impossible. Not a week goes by without
some scandal. is government clerk won’t let it drop, he’ll go on with the thing."
Vronsky saw all the thanklessness of the business, and that there could be no
question of a duel in it, that everything must be done to soen the government
clerk, and hush the maer up. e colonel had called in Vronsky just because

cxx
he knew him to be an honorable and intelligent man, and, more than all, a man
who cared for the honor of the regiment. ey talked it over, and decided that
Petritsky and Kedrov must go with Vronsky to Venden’s to apologize. e colonel
and Vronsky were both fully aware that Vronsky’s name and rank would be sure
to contribute greatly to the soening of the injured husband’s feelings.
And these two inﬂuences were not in fact without eﬀect; though the result
remained, as Vronsky had described, uncertain.
On reaching the French theater, Vronsky retired to the foyer with the
colonel, and reported to him his success, or non-success. e colonel, thinking
it all over, made up his mind not to pursue the maer further, but then for his
own satisfaction proceeded to cross-examine Vronsky about his interview; and it
was a long while before he could restrain his laughter, as Vronsky described how
the government clerk, aer subsiding for a while, would suddenly ﬂare up again,
as he recalled the details, and how Vronsky, at the last half word of conciliation,
skillfully maneuvered a retreat, shoving Petritsky out before him.
"It’s a disgraceful story, but killing. Kedrov really can’t ﬁght the gentleman!
Was he so awfully hot?" he commented, laughing. "But what do you say to Claire
today? She’s marvelous," he went on, speaking of a new French actress. "However
oen you see her, every day she’s diﬀerent. It’s only the French who can do that."

Chapter 
Princess Betsy drove home from the theater, without waiting for the end of the
last act. She had only just time to go into her dressing room, sprinkle her long,
pale face with powder, rub it, set her dress to rights, and order tea in the big
drawing room, when one aer another carriages drove up to her huge house in
Bolshaia Morskaia. Her guests stepped out at the wide entrance, and the stout
porter, who used to read the newspapers in the mornings behind the glass door,
to the ediﬁcation of the passers-by, noiselessly opened the immense door, leing
the visitors pass by him into the house.
Almost at the same instant the hostess, with freshly arranged coiﬀure and
freshened face, walked in at one door and her guests at the other door of the drawing room, a large room with dark walls, downy rugs, and a brightly lighted table,
gleaming with the light of candles, white cloth, silver samovar, and transparent
china tea things.
e hostess sat down at the table and took oﬀ her gloves. Chairs were set
with the aid of footmen, moving almost imperceptibly about the room; the party
seled itself, divided into two groups: one round the samovar near the hostess,
the other at the opposite end of the drawing room, round the handsome wife of an

cxxi
ambassador, in black velvet, with sharply deﬁned black eyebrows. In both groups
conversation wavered, as it always does, for the ﬁrst few minutes, broken up by
meetings, greetings, oﬀers of tea, and as it were, feeling about for something to
rest upon.
"She’s exceptionally good as an actress; one can see she’s studied Kaulbach,"
said a diplomatic aache in the group round the ambassador’s wife. "Did you
notice how she fell down?…"
"Oh, please, don’t let us talk about Nilsson! No one can possibly say anything new about her," said a fat, red-faced, ﬂaxen-headed lady, without eyebrows
and chignon, wearing an old silk dress. is was Princess Myakaya, noted for
her simplicity and the roughness of her manners, and nicknamed enfant terrible.
Princess Myakaya, siing in the middle between the two groups, and listening
to both, took part in the conversation ﬁrst of one and then of the other. "ree
people have used that very phrase about Kaulbach to me today already, just as
though they had made a compact about it. And I can’t see why they liked that
remark so."
e conversation was cut short by this observation, and a new subject had
to be thought of again.
"Do tell me something amusing but not spiteful," said the ambassador’s wife,
a great proﬁcient in the art of that elegant conversation called by the English,
small talk. She addressed the aache, who was at a loss now what to begin upon.
"ey say that that’s a diﬃcult task, that nothing’s amusing that isn’t spiteful," he began with a smile. "But I’ll try. Get me a subject. It all lies in the subject.
If a subject’s given me, it’s easy to spin something round it. I oen think that the
celebrated talkers of the last century would have found it diﬃcult to talk cleverly
now. Everything clever is so stale…"
"at has been said long ago," the ambassador’s wife interrupted him, laughing.
e conversation began amiably, but just because it was too amiable, it came
to a stop again. ey had to have recourse to the sure, never-failing topic—gossip.
"Don’t you think there’s something Louis inze about Tushkevitch?" he
said, glancing towards a handsome, fair-haired young man, standing at the table.
"Oh, yes! He’s in the same style as the drawing room and that’s why it is
he’s so oen here."
is conversation was maintained, since it rested on allusions to what could
not be talked of in that room—that is to say, of the relations of Tushkevitch with
their hostess.
Round the samovar and the hostess the conversation had been meanwhile
vacillating in just the same way between three inevitable topics: the latest piece
of public news, the theater, and scandal. It, too, came ﬁnally to rest on the last

cxxii
topic, that is, ill-natured gossip.
"Have you heard the Maltishtcheva woman—the mother, not the daughter—has ordered a costume in diable rose color?"
"Nonsense! No, that’s too lovely!"
"I wonder that with her sense—for she’s not a fool, you know—that she
doesn’t see how funny she is."
Everyone had something to say in censure or ridicule of the luckless
Madame Maltishtcheva, and the conversation crackled merrily, like a burning
faggot-stack.
e husband of Princess Betsy, a good-natured fat man, an ardent collector
of engravings, hearing that his wife had visitors, came into the drawing room
before going to his club. Stepping noiselessly over the thick rugs, he went up to
Princess Myakaya.
"How did you like Nilsson?" he asked.
"Oh, how can you steal upon anyone like that! How you startled me!" she
responded. "Please don’t talk to me about the opera; you know nothing about
music. I’d beer meet you on your own ground, and talk about your majolica
and engravings. Come now, what treasure have you been buying lately at the old
curiosity shops?"
"Would you like me to show you? But you don’t understand such things."
"Oh, do show me! I’ve been learning about them at those—what’s their
names?… the bankers … they’ve some splendid engravings. ey showed them
to us."
"Why, have you been at the Schützburgs?" asked the hostess from the
samovar.
"Yes, ma ère. ey asked my husband and me to dinner, and told us the
sauce at that dinner cost a hundred pounds," Princess Myakaya said, speaking
loudly, and conscious everyone was listening; "and very nasty sauce it was, some
green mess. We had to ask them, and I made them sauce for eighteen pence, and
everybody was very much pleased with it. I can’t run to hundred-pound sauces."
"She’s unique!" said the lady of the house.
"Marvelous!" said someone.
e sensation produced by Princess Myakaya’s speeches was always
unique, and the secret of the sensation she produced lay in the fact that though
she spoke not always appropriately, as now, she said simple things with some
sense in them. In the society in which she lived such plain statements produced
the eﬀect of the wiiest epigram. Princess Myakaya could never see why it had
that eﬀect, but she knew it had, and took advantage of it.
As everyone had been listening while Princess Myakaya spoke, and so the
conversation around the ambassador’s wife had dropped, Princess Betsy tried to

cxxiii
bring the whole party together, and turned to the ambassador’s wife.
"Will you really not have tea? You should come over here by us."
"No, we’re very happy here," the ambassador’s wife responded with a smile,
and she went on with the conversation that had been begun.
It was a very agreeable conversation. ey were criticizing the Karenins,
husband and wife.
"Anna is quite changed since her stay in Moscow. ere’s something strange
about her," said her friend.
"e great change is that she brought back with her the shadow of Alexey
Vronsky," said the ambassador’s wife.
"Well, what of it? ere’s a fable of Grimm’s about a man without a shadow,
a man who’s lost his shadow. And that’s his punishment for something. I never
could understand how it was a punishment. But a woman must dislike being
without a shadow."
"Yes, but women with a shadow usually come to a bad end," said Anna’s
friend.
"Bad luck to your tongue!" said Princess Myakaya suddenly. "Madame
Karenina’s a splendid woman. I don’t like her husband, but I like her very much."
"Why don’t you like her husband? He’s such a remarkable man," said the
ambassador’s wife. "My husband says there are few statesmen like him in Europe."
"And my husband tells me just the same, but I don’t believe it," said Princess
Myakaya. "If our husbands didn’t talk to us, we should see the facts as they are.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, to my thinking, is simply a fool. I say it in a whisper …
but doesn’t it really make everything clear? Before, when I was told to consider
him clever, I kept looking for his ability, and thought myself a fool for not seeing
it; but directly I said, he’s a fool, though only in a whisper, everything’s explained,
isn’t it?"
"How spiteful you are today!"
"Not a bit. I’d no other way out of it. One of the two had to be a fool. And,
well, you know one can’t say that of oneself."
"‘No one is satisﬁed with his fortune, and everyone is satisﬁed with his wit.’"
e aaché repeated the French saying.
"at’s just it, just it," Princess Myakaya turned to him. "But the point is
that I won’t abandon Anna to your mercies. She’s so nice, so charming. How can
she help it if they’re all in love with her, and follow her about like shadows?"
"Oh, I had no idea of blaming her for it," Anna’s friend said in self-defense.
"If no one follows us about like a shadow, that’s no proof that we’ve any
right to blame her."
And having duly disposed of Anna’s friend, the Princess Myakaya got up,
and together with the ambassador’s wife, joined the group at the table, where the

cxxiv
conversation was dealing with the king of Prussia.
"What wicked gossip were you talking over there?" asked Betsy.
"About the Karenins. e princess gave us a sketch of Alexey Alexandrovitch," said the ambassador’s wife with a smile, as she sat down at the table.
"Pity we didn’t hear it!" said Princess Betsy, glancing towards the door. "Ah,
here you are at last!" she said, turning with a smile to Vronsky, as he came in.
Vronsky was not merely acquainted with all the persons whom he was
meeting here; he saw them all every day; and so he came in with the quiet manner
with which one enters a room full of people from whom one has only just parted.
"Where do I come from?" he said, in answer to a question from the ambassador’s wife. "Well, there’s no help for it, I must confess. From the opera bouﬀé.
I do believe I’ve seen it a hundred times, and always with fresh enjoyment. It’s
exquisite! I know it’s disgraceful, but I go to sleep at the opera, and I sit out the
opera bouﬀé to the last minute, and enjoy it. is evening…"
He mentioned a French actress, and was going to tell something about her;
but the ambassador’s wife, with playful horror, cut him short.
"Please don’t tell us about that horror."
"All right, I won’t especially as everyone knows those horrors."
"And we should all go to see them if it were accepted as the correct thing,
like the opera," chimed in Princess Myakaya.

Chapter 
Steps were heard at the door, and Princess Betsy, knowing it was Madame Karenina, glanced at Vronsky. He was looking towards the door, and his face wore a
strange new expression. Joyfully, intently, and at the same time timidly, he gazed
at the approaching ﬁgure, and slowly he rose to his feet. Anna walked into the
drawing room. Holding herself extremely erect, as always, looking straight before her, and moving with her swi, resolute, and light step, that distinguished
her from all other society women, she crossed the short space to her hostess,
shook hands with her, smiled, and with the same smile looked around at Vronsky.
Vronsky bowed low and pushed a chair up for her.
She acknowledged this only by a slight nod, ﬂushed a lile, and frowned.
But immediately, while rapidly greeting her acquaintances, and shaking the hands
proﬀered to her, she addressed Princess Betsy:
"I have been at Countess Lidia’s, and meant to have come here earlier, but I
stayed on. Sir John was there. He’s very interesting."
"Oh, that’s this missionary?"
"Yes; he told us about the life in India, most interesting things."

cxxv
e conversation, interrupted by her coming in, ﬂickered up again like the
light of a lamp being blown out.
"Sir John! Yes, Sir John; I’ve seen him. He speaks well. e Vlassieva girl’s
quite in love with him."
"And is it true the younger Vlassieva girl’s to marry Topov?"
"Yes, they say it’s quite a seled thing."
"I wonder at the parents! ey say it’s a marriage for love."
"For love? What antediluvian notions you have! Can one talk of love in
these days?" said the ambassador’s wife.
"What’s to be done? It’s a foolish old fashion that’s kept up still," said Vronsky.
"So much the worse for those who keep up the fashion. e only happy
marriages I know are marriages of prudence."
"Yes, but then how oen the happiness of these prudent marriages ﬂies away
like dust just because that passion turns up that they have refused to recognize,"
said Vronsky.
"But by marriages of prudence we mean those in which both parties have
sown their wild oats already. at’s like scarlatina—one has to go through it and
get it over."
"en they ought to ﬁnd out how to vaccinate for love, like smallpox."
"I was in love in my young days with a deacon," said the Princess Myakaya.
"I don’t know that it did me any good."
"No; I imagine, joking apart, that to know love, one must make mistakes and
then correct them," said Princess Betsy.
"Even aer marriage?" said the ambassador’s wife playfully.
"‘It’s never too late to mend.’" e aaché repeated the English proverb.
"Just so," Betsy agreed; "one must make mistakes and correct them. What do
you think about it?" she turned to Anna, who, with a faintly perceptible resolute
smile on her lips, was listening in silence to the conversation.
"I think," said Anna, playing with the glove she had taken oﬀ, "I think … of
so many men, so many minds, certainly so many hearts, so many kinds of love."
Vronsky was gazing at Anna, and with a fainting heart waiting for what she
would say. He sighed as aer a danger escaped when she uered these words.
Anna suddenly turned to him.
"Oh, I have had a leer from Moscow. ey write me that Kiy
Shtcherbatskaya’s very ill."
"Really?" said Vronsky, kniing his brows.
Anna looked sternly at him.
"at doesn’t interest you?"
"On the contrary, it does, very much. What was it exactly they told you, if

cxxvi
I may know?" he questioned.
Anna got up and went to Betsy.
"Give me a cup of tea," she said, standing at her table.
While Betsy was pouring out the tea, Vronsky went up to Anna.
"What is it they write to you?" he repeated.
"I oen think men have no understanding of what’s not honorable though
they’re always talking of it," said Anna, without answering him. "I’ve wanted to
tell you so a long while," she added, and moving a few steps away, she sat down
at a table in a corner covered with albums.
"I don’t quite understand the meaning of your words," he said, handing her
the cup.
She glanced towards the sofa beside her, and he instantly sat down.
"Yes, I have been wanting to tell you," she said, not looking at him. "You
behaved wrongly, very wrongly."
"Do you suppose I don’t know that I’ve acted wrongly? But who was the
cause of my doing so?"
"What do you say that to me for?" she said, glancing severely at him.
"You know what for," he answered boldly and joyfully, meeting her glance
and not dropping his eyes.
Not he, but she, was confused.
"at only shows you have no heart," she said. But her eyes said that she
knew he had a heart, and that was why she was afraid of him.
"What you spoke of just now was a mistake, and not love."
"Remember that I have forbidden you to uer that word, that hateful word,"
said Anna, with a shudder. But at once she felt that by that very word "forbidden"
she had shown that she acknowledged certain rights over him, and by that very
fact was encouraging him to speak of love. "I have long meant to tell you this," she
went on, looking resolutely into his eyes, and hot all over from the burning ﬂush
on her cheeks. "I’ve come on purpose this evening, knowing I should meet you.
I have come to tell you that this must end. I have never blushed before anyone,
and you force me to feel to blame for something."
He looked at her and was struck by a new spiritual beauty in her face.
"What do you wish of me?" he said simply and seriously.
"I want you to go to Moscow and ask for Kiy’s forgiveness," she said.
"You don’t wish that?" he said.
He saw she was saying what she forced herself to say, not what she wanted
to say.
"If you love me, as you say," she whispered, "do so that I may be at peace."
His face grew radiant.
"Don’t you know that you’re all my life to me? But I know no peace, and I

cxxvii
can’t give it to you; all myself—and love … yes. I can’t think of you and myself
apart. You and I are one to me. And I see no chance before us of peace for me or
for you. I see a chance of despair, of wretchedness … or I see a chance of bliss,
what bliss!… Can it be there’s no chance of it?" he murmured with his lips; but
she heard.
She strained every eﬀort of her mind to say what ought to be said. But
instead of that she let her eyes rest on him, full of love, and made no answer.
"It’s come!" he thought in ecstasy. "When I was beginning to despair, and it
seemed there would be no end—it’s come! She loves me! She owns it!"
"en do this for me: never say such things to me, and let us be friends," she
said in words; but her eyes spoke quite diﬀerently.
"Friends we shall never be, you know that yourself. Whether we shall be
the happiest or the wretchedest of people—that’s in your hands."
She would have said something, but he interrupted her.
"I ask one thing only: I ask for the right to hope, to suﬀer as I do. But if even
that cannot be, command me to disappear, and I disappear. You shall not see me
if my presence is distasteful to you."
"I don’t want to drive you away."
"Only don’t change anything, leave everything as it is," he said in a shaky
voice. "Here’s your husband."
At that instant Alexey Alexandrovitch did in fact walk into the room with
his calm, awkward gait.
Glancing at his wife and Vronsky, he went up to the lady of the house, and
siing down for a cup of tea, began talking in his deliberate, always audible voice,
in his habitual tone of banter, ridiculing someone.
"Your Rambouillet is in full conclave," he said, looking round at all the party;
"the graces and the muses."
But Princess Betsy could not endure that tone of his—"sneering," as she
called it, using the English word, and like a skillful hostess she at once brought
him into a serious conversation on the subject of universal conscription. Alexey
Alexandrovitch was immediately interested in the subject, and began seriously
defending the new imperial decree against Princess Betsy, who had aacked it.
Vronsky and Anna still sat at the lile table.
"is is geing indecorous," whispered one lady, with an expressive glance
at Madame Karenina, Vronsky, and her husband.
"What did I tell you?" said Anna’s friend.
But not only those ladies, almost everyone in the room, even the Princess
Myakaya and Betsy herself, looked several times in the direction of the two who
had withdrawn from the general circle, as though that were a disturbing fact.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was the only person who did not once look in that direc-

cxxviii
tion, and was not diverted from the interesting discussion he had entered upon.
Noticing the disagreeable impression that was being made on everyone,
Princess Betsy slipped someone else into her place to listen to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and went up to Anna.
"I’m always amazed at the clearness and precision of your husband’s language," she said. "e most transcendental ideas seem to be within my grasp when
he’s speaking."
"Oh, yes!" said Anna, radiant with a smile of happiness, and not understanding a word of what Betsy had said. She crossed over to the big table and took part
in the general conversation.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, aer staying half an hour, went up to his wife and
suggested that they should go home together. But she answered, not looking at
him, that she was staying to supper. Alexey Alexandrovitch made his bows and
withdrew.
e fat old Tatar, Madame Karenina’s coachman, was with diﬃculty holding
one of her pair of grays, chilled with the cold and rearing at the entrance. A
footman stood opening the carriage door. e hall porter stood holding open
the great door of the house. Anna Arkadyevna, with her quick lile hand, was
unfastening the lace of her sleeve, caught in the hook of her fur cloak, and with
bent head listening to the words Vronsky murmured as he escorted her down.
"You’ve said nothing, of course, and I ask nothing," he was saying; "but you
know that friendship’s not what I want: that there’s only one happiness in life for
me, that word that you dislike so … yes, love!…"
"Love," she repeated slowly, in an inner voice, and suddenly, at the very
instant she unhooked the lace, she added, "Why I don’t like the word is that it
means too much to me, far more than you can understand," and she glanced into
his face. "Au revoir!"
She gave him her hand, and with her rapid, springy step she passed by the
porter and vanished into the carriage.
Her glance, the touch of her hand, set him aﬂame. He kissed the palm of
his hand where she had touched it, and went home, happy in the sense that he
had got nearer to the aainment of his aims that evening than during the last two
months.

Chapter 
Alexey Alexandrovitch had seen nothing striking or improper in the fact that
his wife was siing with Vronsky at a table apart, in eager conversation with
him about something. But he noticed that to the rest of the party this appeared

cxxix
something striking and improper, and for that reason it seemed to him too to be
improper. He made up his mind that he must speak of it to his wife.
On reaching home Alexey Alexandrovitch went to his study, as he usually
did, seated himself in his low chair, opened a book on the Papacy at the place
where he had laid the paper-knife in it, and read till one o’clock, just as he usually
did. But from time to time he rubbed his high forehead and shook his head, as
though to drive away something. At his usual time he got up and made his toilet
for the night. Anna Arkadyevna had not yet come in. With a book under his arm
he went upstairs. But this evening, instead of his usual thoughts and meditations
upon oﬃcial details, his thoughts were absorbed by his wife and something disagreeable connected with her. Contrary to his usual habit, he did not get into
bed, but fell to walking up and down the rooms with his hands clasped behind his
back. He could not go to bed, feeling that it was absolutely needful for him ﬁrst
to think thoroughly over the position that had just arisen.
When Alexey Alexandrovitch had made up his mind that he must talk to
his wife about it, it had seemed a very easy and simple maer. But now, when he
began to think over the question that had just presented itself, it seemed to him
very complicated and diﬃcult.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was not jealous. Jealousy according to his notions
was an insult to one’s wife, and one ought to have conﬁdence in one’s wife. Why
one ought to have conﬁdence—that is to say, complete conviction that his young
wife would always love him—he did not ask himself. But he had no experience
of lack of conﬁdence, because he had conﬁdence in her, and told himself that
he ought to have it. Now, though his conviction that jealousy was a shameful
feeling and that one ought to feel conﬁdence, had not broken down, he felt that
he was standing face to face with something illogical and irrational, and did not
know what was to be done. Alexey Alexandrovitch was standing face to face with
life, with the possibility of his wife’s loving someone other than himself, and this
seemed to him very irrational and incomprehensible because it was life itself. All
his life Alexey Alexandrovitch had lived and worked in oﬃcial spheres, having to
do with the reﬂection of life. And every time he had stumbled against life itself
he had shrunk away from it. Now he experienced a feeling akin to that of a man
who, while calmly crossing a precipice by a bridge, should suddenly discover that
the bridge is broken, and that there is a chasm below. at chasm was life itself,
the bridge that artiﬁcial life in which Alexey Alexandrovitch had lived. For the
ﬁrst time the question presented itself to him of the possibility of his wife’s loving
someone else, and he was horriﬁed at it.
He did not undress, but walked up and down with his regular tread over
the resounding parquet of the dining room, where one lamp was burning, over
the carpet of the dark drawing room, in which the light was reﬂected on the big

cxxx
new portrait of himself hanging over the sofa, and across her boudoir, where two
candles burned, lighting up the portraits of her parents and woman friends, and
the prey knick-knacks of her writing table, that he knew so well. He walked
across her boudoir to the bedroom door, and turned back again. At each turn in
his walk, especially at the parquet of the lighted dining room, he halted and said to
himself, "Yes, this I must decide and put a stop to; I must express my view of it and
my decision." And he turned back again. "But express what—what decision?" he
said to himself in the drawing room, and he found no reply. "But aer all," he asked
himself before turning into the boudoir, "what has occurred? Nothing. She was
talking a long while with him. But what of that? Surely women in society can talk
to whom they please. And then, jealousy means lowering both myself and her,"
he told himself as he went into her boudoir; but this dictum, which had always
had such weight with him before, had now no weight and no meaning at all. And
from the bedroom door he turned back again; but as he entered the dark drawing
room some inner voice told him that it was not so, and that if others noticed it
that showed that there was something. And he said to himself again in the dining
room, "Yes, I must decide and put a stop to it, and express my view of it…" And
again at the turn in the drawing room he asked himself, "Decide how?" And again
he asked himself, "What had occurred?" and answered, "Nothing," and recollected
that jealousy was a feeling insulting to his wife; but again in the drawing room he
was convinced that something had happened. His thoughts, like his body, went
round a complete circle, without coming upon anything new. He noticed this,
rubbed his forehead, and sat down in her boudoir.
ere, looking at her table, with the malachite bloing case lying at the top
and an unﬁnished leer, his thoughts suddenly changed. He began to think of
her, of what she was thinking and feeling. For the ﬁrst time he pictured vividly
to himself her personal life, her ideas, her desires, and the idea that she could and
should have a separate life of her own seemed to him so alarming that he made
haste to dispel it. It was the chasm which he was afraid to peep into. To put
himself in thought and feeling in another person’s place was a spiritual exercise
not natural to Alexey Alexandrovitch. He looked on this spiritual exercise as a
harmful and dangerous abuse of the fancy.
"And the worst of it all," thought he, "is that just now, at the very moment
when my great work is approaching completion" (he was thinking of the project
he was bringing forward at the time), "when I stand in need of all my mental
peace and all my energies, just now this stupid worry should fall foul of me. But
what’s to be done? I’m not one of those men who submit to uneasiness and worry
without having the force of character to face them.
"I must think it over, come to a decision, and put it out of my mind," he said
aloud.

cxxxi
"e question of her feelings, of what has passed and may be passing in her
soul, that’s not my aﬀair; that’s the aﬀair of her conscience, and falls under the
head of religion," he said to himself, feeling consolation in the sense that he had
found to which division of regulating principles this new circumstance could be
properly referred.
"And so," Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, "questions as to her feelings, and so on, are questions for her conscience, with which I can have nothing
to do. My duty is clearly deﬁned. As the head of the family, I am a person bound
in duty to guide her, and consequently, in part the person responsible; I am bound
to point out the danger I perceive, to warn her, even to use my authority. I ought
to speak plainly to her." And everything that he would say tonight to his wife took
clear shape in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s head. inking over what he would say,
he somewhat regreed that he should have to use his time and mental powers for
domestic consumption, with so lile to show for it, but, in spite of that, the form
and contents of the speech before him shaped itself as clearly and distinctly in his
head as a ministerial report.
"I must say and express fully the following points: ﬁrst, exposition of the
value to be aached to public opinion and to decorum; secondly, exposition of
religious signiﬁcance of marriage; thirdly, if need be, reference to the calamity
possibly ensuing to our son; fourthly, reference to the unhappiness likely to result
to herself." And, interlacing his ﬁngers, Alexey Alexandrovitch stretched them,
and the joints of the ﬁngers cracked. is trick, a bad habit, the cracking of his
ﬁngers, always soothed him, and gave precision to his thoughts, so needful to him
at this juncture.
ere was the sound of a carriage driving up to the front door. Alexey
Alexandrovitch halted in the middle of the room.
A woman’s step was heard mounting the stairs. Alexey Alexandrovitch,
ready for his speech, stood compressing his crossed ﬁngers, waiting to see if the
crack would not come again. One joint cracked.
Already, from the sound of light steps on the stairs, he was aware that she
was close, and though he was satisﬁed with his speech, he felt frightened of the
explanation confronting him…

Chapter 
Anna came in with hanging head, playing with the tassels of her hood. Her face
was brilliant and glowing; but this glow was not one of brightness; it suggested
the fearful glow of a conﬂagration in the midst of a dark night. On seeing her
husband, Anna raised her head and smiled, as though she had just waked up.

cxxxii
"You’re not in bed? What a wonder!" she said, leing fall her hood, and
without stopping, she went on into the dressing room. "It’s late, Alexey Alexandrovitch," she said, when she had gone through the doorway.
"Anna, it’s necessary for me to have a talk with you."
"With me?" she said, wonderingly. She came out from behind the door of
the dressing room, and looked at him. "Why, what is it? What about?" she asked,
siing down. "Well, let’s talk, if it’s so necessary. But it would be beer to get to
sleep."
Anna said what came to her lips, and marveled, hearing herself, at her own
capacity for lying. How simple and natural were her words, and how likely that
she was simply sleepy! She felt herself clad in an impenetrable armor of falsehood.
She felt that some unseen force had come to her aid and was supporting her.
"Anna, I must warn you," he began.
"Warn me?" she said. "Of what?"
She looked at him so simply, so brightly, that anyone who did not know
her as her husband knew her could not have noticed anything unnatural, either
in the sound or the sense of her words. But to him, knowing her, knowing that
whenever he went to bed ﬁve minutes later than usual, she noticed it, and asked
him the reason; to him, knowing that every joy, every pleasure and pain that
she felt she communicated to him at once; to him, now to see that she did not
care to notice his state of mind, that she did not care to say a word about herself,
meant a great deal. He saw that the inmost recesses of her soul, that had always
hitherto lain open before him, were closed against him. More than that, he saw
from her tone that she was not even perturbed at that, but as it were said straight
out to him: "Yes, it’s shut up, and so it must be, and will be in future." Now he
experienced a feeling such as a man might have, returning home and ﬁnding his
own house locked up. "But perhaps the key may yet be found," thought Alexey
Alexandrovitch.
"I want to warn you," he said in a low voice, "that through thoughtlessness
and lack of caution you may cause yourself to be talked about in society. Your
too animated conversation this evening with Count Vronsky" (he enunciated the
name ﬁrmly and with deliberate emphasis) "aracted aention."
He talked and looked at her laughing eyes, which frightened him now with
their impenetrable look, and, as he talked, he felt all the uselessness and idleness
of his words.
"You’re always like that," she answered, as though completely misapprehending him, and of all he had said only taking in the last phrase. "One time you
don’t like my being dull, and another time you don’t like my being lively. I wasn’t
dull. Does that oﬀend you?"
Alexey Alexandrovitch shivered, and bent his hands to make the joints

cxxxiii
crack.
"Oh, please, don’t do that, I do so dislike it," she said.
"Anna, is this you?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, quietly making an eﬀort
over himself, and restraining the motion of his ﬁngers.
"But what is it all about?" she said, with such genuine and droll wonder.
"What do you want of me?"
Alexey Alexandrovitch paused, and rubbed his forehead and his eyes. He
saw that instead of doing as he had intended—that is to say, warning his wife
against a mistake in the eyes of the world—he had unconsciously become agitated
over what was the aﬀair of her conscience, and was struggling against the barrier
he fancied between them.
"is is what I meant to say to you," he went on coldly and composedly,
"and I beg you to listen to it. I consider jealousy, as you know, a humiliating
and degrading feeling, and I shall never allow myself to be inﬂuenced by it; but
there are certain rules of decorum which cannot be disregarded with impunity.
is evening it was not I observed it, but judging by the impression made on
the company, everyone observed that your conduct and deportment were not
altogether what could be desired."
"I positively don’t understand," said Anna, shrugging her shoulders—"He
doesn’t care," she thought. "But other people noticed it, and that’s what upsets
him."—"You’re not well, Alexey Alexandrovitch," she added, and she got up, and
would have gone towards the door; but he moved forward as though he would
stop her.
His face was ugly and forbidding, as Anna had never seen him. She stopped,
and bending her head back and on one side, began with her rapid hand taking out
her hairpins.
"Well, I’m listening to what’s to come," she said, calmly and ironically; "and
indeed I listen with interest, for I should like to understand what’s the maer."
She spoke, and marveled at the conﬁdent, calm, and natural tone in which
she was speaking, and the choice of the words she used.
"To enter into all the details of your feelings I have no right, and besides, I
regard that as useless and even harmful," began Alexey Alexandrovitch. "Ferreting
in one’s soul, one oen ferrets out something that might have lain there unnoticed.
Your feelings are an aﬀair of your own conscience; but I am in duty bound to you,
to myself, and to God, to point out to you your duties. Our life has been joined,
not by man, but by God. at union can only be severed by a crime, and a crime
of that nature brings its own chastisement."
"I don’t understand a word. And, oh dear! how sleepy I am, unluckily," she
said, rapidly passing her hand through her hair, feeling for the remaining hairpins.
"Anna, for God’s sake don’t speak like that!" he said gently. "Perhaps I am

cxxxiv
mistaken, but believe me, what I say, I say as much for myself as for you. I am
your husband, and I love you."
For an instant her face fell, and the mocking gleam in her eyes died away;
but the word love threw her into revolt again. She thought: "Love? Can he love?
If he hadn’t heard there was such a thing as love, he would never have used the
word. He doesn’t even know what love is."
"Alexey Alexandrovitch, really I don’t understand," she said. "Deﬁne what
it is you ﬁnd…"
"Pardon, let me say all I have to say. I love you. But I am not speaking of
myself; the most important persons in this maer are our son and yourself. It
may very well be, I repeat, that my words seem to you uerly unnecessary and
out of place; it may be that they are called forth by my mistaken impression. In
that case, I beg you to forgive me. But if you are conscious yourself of even the
smallest foundation for them, then I beg you to think a lile, and if your heart
prompts you, to speak out to me…"
Alexey Alexandrovitch was unconsciously saying something uerly unlike
what he had prepared.
"I have nothing to say. And besides," she said hurriedly, with diﬃculty repressing a smile, "it’s really time to be in bed."
Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed, and, without saying more, went into the
bedroom.
When she came into the bedroom, he was already in bed. His lips were
sternly compressed, and his eyes looked away from her. Anna got into her bed,
and lay expecting every minute that he would begin to speak to her again. She
both feared his speaking and wished for it. But he was silent. She waited for a long
while without moving, and had forgoen about him. She thought of that other;
she pictured him, and felt how her heart was ﬂooded with emotion and guilty
delight at the thought of him. Suddenly she heard an even, tranquil snore. For
the ﬁrst instant Alexey Alexandrovitch seemed, as it were, appalled at his own
snoring, and ceased; but aer an interval of two breathings the snore sounded
again, with a new tranquil rhythm.
"It’s late, it’s late," she whispered with a smile. A long while she lay, not
moving, with open eyes, whose brilliance she almost fancied she could herself
see in the darkness.

Chapter 
From that time a new life began for Alexey Alexandrovitch and for his wife.
Nothing special happened. Anna went out into society, as she had always done,

cxxxv
was particularly oen at Princess Betsy’s, and met Vronsky everywhere. Alexey
Alexandrovitch saw this, but could do nothing. All his eﬀorts to draw her into
open discussion she confronted with a barrier which he could not penetrate, made
up of a sort of amused perplexity. Outwardly everything was the same, but their
inner relations were completely changed. Alexey Alexandrovitch, a man of great
power in the world of politics, felt himself helpless in this. Like an ox with head
bent, submissively he awaited the blow which he felt was lied over him. Every
time he began to think about it, he felt that he must try once more, that by kindness, tenderness, and persuasion there was still hope of saving her, of bringing
her back to herself, and every day he made ready to talk to her. But every time
he began talking to her, he felt that the spirit of evil and deceit, which had taken
possession of her, had possession of him too, and he talked to her in a tone quite
unlike that in which he had meant to talk. Involuntarily he talked to her in his
habitual tone of jeering at anyone who should say what he was saying. And in
that tone it was impossible to say what needed to be said to her.

Chapter 
at which for Vronsky had been almost a whole year the one absorbing desire of
his life, replacing all his old desires; that which for Anna had been an impossible,
terrible, and even for that reason more entrancing dream of bliss, that desire had
been fulﬁlled. He stood before her, pale, his lower jaw quivering, and besought
her to be calm, not knowing how or why.
"Anna! Anna!" he said with a choking voice, "Anna, for pity’s sake!…"
But the louder he spoke, the lower she dropped her once proud and gay,
now shame-stricken head, and she bowed down and sank from the sofa where
she was siing, down on the ﬂoor, at his feet; she would have fallen on the carpet
if he had not held her.
"My God! Forgive me!" she said, sobbing, pressing his hands to her bosom.
She felt so sinful, so guilty, that nothing was le her but to humiliate herself
and beg forgiveness; and as now there was no one in her life but him, to him she
addressed her prayer for forgiveness. Looking at him, she had a physical sense of
her humiliation, and she could say nothing more. He felt what a murderer must
feel, when he sees the body he has robbed of life. at body, robbed by him of
life, was their love, the ﬁrst stage of their love. ere was something awful and
revolting in the memory of what had been bought at this fearful price of shame.
Shame at their spiritual nakedness crushed her and infected him. But in spite of
all the murderer’s horror before the body of his victim, he must hack it to pieces,
hide the body, must use what he has gained by his murder.

cxxxvi
And with fury, as it were with passion, the murderer falls on the body, and
drags it and hacks at it; so he covered her face and shoulders with kisses. She
held his hand, and did not stir. "Yes, these kisses—that is what has been bought
by this shame. Yes, and one hand, which will always be mine—the hand of my
accomplice." She lied up that hand and kissed it. He sank on his knees and tried
to see her face; but she hid it, and said nothing. At last, as though making an eﬀort
over herself, she got up and pushed him away. Her face was still as beautiful, but
it was only the more pitiful for that.
"All is over," she said; "I have nothing but you. Remember that."
"I can never forget what is my whole life. For one instant of this happiness…"
"Happiness!" she said with horror and loathing and her horror unconsciously infected him. "For pity’s sake, not a word, not a word more."
She rose quickly and moved away from him.
"Not a word more," she repeated, and with a look of chill despair, incomprehensible to him, she parted from him. She felt that at that moment she could
not put into words the sense of shame, of rapture, and of horror at this stepping
into a new life, and she did not want to speak of it, to vulgarize this feeling by
inappropriate words. But later too, and the next day and the third day, she still
found no words in which she could express the complexity of her feelings; indeed,
she could not even ﬁnd thoughts in which she could clearly think out all that was
in her soul.
She said to herself: "No, just now I can’t think of it, later on, when I am
calmer." But this calm for thought never came; every time the thought rose of
what she had done and what would happen to her, and what she ought to do, a
horror came over her and she drove those thoughts away.
"Later, later," she said—"when I am calmer."
But in dreams, when she had no control over her thoughts, her position
presented itself to her in all its hideous nakedness. One dream haunted her almost
every night. She dreamed that both were her husbands at once, that both were
lavishing caresses on her. Alexey Alexandrovitch was weeping, kissing her hands,
and saying, "How happy we are now!" And Alexey Vronsky was there too, and he
too was her husband. And she was marveling that it had once seemed impossible
to her, was explaining to them, laughing, that this was ever so much simpler, and
that now both of them were happy and contented. But this dream weighed on her
like a nightmare, and she awoke from it in terror.

Chapter 
In the early days aer his return from Moscow, whenever Levin shuddered and

cxxxvii
grew red, remembering the disgrace of his rejection, he said to himself: "is was
just how I used to shudder and blush, thinking myself uerly lost, when I was
plucked in physics and did not get my remove; and how I thought myself uerly
ruined aer I had mismanaged that aﬀair of my sister’s that was entrusted to me.
And yet, now that years have passed, I recall it and wonder that it could distress
me so much. It will be the same thing too with this trouble. Time will go by and
I shall not mind about this either."
But three months had passed and he had not le oﬀ minding about it; and
it was as painful for him to think of it as it had been those ﬁrst days. He could
not be at peace because aer dreaming so long of family life, and feeling himself
so ripe for it, he was still not married, and was further than ever from marriage.
He was painfully conscious himself, as were all about him, that at his years it is
not well for man to be alone. He remembered how before starting for Moscow he
had once said to his cowman Nikolay, a simple-hearted peasant, whom he liked
talking to: "Well, Nikolay! I mean to get married," and how Nikolay had promptly
answered, as of a maer on which there could be no possible doubt: "And high
time too, Konstantin Demitrievitch." But marriage had now become further oﬀ
than ever. e place was taken, and whenever he tried to imagine any of the
girls he knew in that place, he felt that it was uerly impossible. Moreover, the
recollection of the rejection and the part he had played in the aﬀair tortured him
with shame. However oen he told himself that he was in no wise to blame in
it, that recollection, like other humiliating reminiscences of a similar kind, made
him twinge and blush. ere had been in his past, as in every man’s, actions,
recognized by him as bad, for which his conscience ought to have tormented him;
but the memory of these evil actions was far from causing him so much suﬀering
as those trivial but humiliating reminiscences. ese wounds never healed. And
with these memories was now ranged his rejection and the pitiful position in
which he must have appeared to others that evening. But time and work did their
part. Bier memories were more and more covered up by the incidents—paltry
in his eyes, but really important—of his country life. Every week he thought less
oen of Kiy. He was impatiently looking forward to the news that she was
married, or just going to be married, hoping that such news would, like having a
tooth out, completely cure him.
Meanwhile spring came on, beautiful and kindly, without the delays and
treacheries of spring,—one of those rare springs in which plants, beasts, and man
rejoice alike. is lovely spring roused Levin still more, and strengthened him
in his resolution of renouncing all his past and building up his lonely life ﬁrmly
and independently. ough many of the plans with which he had returned to
the country had not been carried out, still his most important resolution—that
of purity—had been kept by him. He was free from that shame, which had usu-

cxxxviii
ally harassed him aer a fall; and he could look everyone straight in the face.
In February he had received a leer from Marya Nikolaevna telling him that his
brother Nikolay’s health was geing worse, but that he would not take advice,
and in consequence of this leer Levin went to Moscow to his brother’s and succeeded in persuading him to see a doctor and to go to a watering-place abroad.
He succeeded so well in persuading his brother, and in lending him money for
the journey without irritating him, that he was satisﬁed with himself in that matter. In addition to his farming, which called for special aention in spring, and in
addition to reading, Levin had begun that winter a work on agriculture, the plan
of which turned on taking into account the character of the laborer on the land
as one of the unalterable data of the question, like the climate and the soil, and
consequently deducing all the principles of scientiﬁc culture, not simply from the
data of soil and climate, but from the data of soil, climate, and a certain unalterable character of the laborer. us, in spite of his solitude, or in consequence of
his solitude, his life was exceedingly full. Only rarely he suﬀered from an unsatisﬁed desire to communicate his stray ideas to someone besides Agafea Mihalovna.
With her indeed he not infrequently fell into discussion upon physics, the theory
of agriculture, and especially philosophy; philosophy was Agafea Mihalovna’s
favorite subject.
Spring was slow in unfolding. For the last few weeks it had been steadily
ﬁne frosty weather. In the daytime it thawed in the sun, but at night there were
even seven degrees of frost. ere was such a frozen surface on the snow that
they drove the wagons anywhere oﬀ the roads. Easter came in the snow. en all
of a sudden, on Easter Monday, a warm wind sprang up, storm clouds swooped
down, and for three days and three nights the warm, driving rain fell in streams.
On ursday the wind dropped, and a thick gray fog brooded over the land as
though hiding the mysteries of the transformations that were being wrought in
nature. Behind the fog there was the ﬂowing of water, the cracking and ﬂoating
of ice, the swi rush of turbid, foaming torrents; and on the following Monday, in
the evening, the fog parted, the storm clouds split up into lile curling crests of
cloud, the sky cleared, and the real spring had come. In the morning the sun rose
brilliant and quickly wore away the thin layer of ice that covered the water, and all
the warm air was quivering with the steam that rose up from the quickened earth.
e old grass looked greener, and the young grass thrust up its tiny blades; the
buds of the guelder-rose and of the currant and the sticky birch-buds were swollen
with sap, and an exploring bee was humming about the golden blossoms that
studded the willow. Larks trilled unseen above the velvety green ﬁelds and the
ice-covered stubble-land; peewits wailed over the low lands and marshes ﬂooded
by the pools; cranes and wild geese ﬂew high across the sky uering their spring
calls. e cale, bald in patches where the new hair had not grown yet, lowed in

cxxxix
the pastures; the bowlegged lambs frisked round their bleating mothers. Nimble
children ran about the drying paths, covered with the prints of bare feet. ere
was a merry chaer of peasant women over their linen at the pond, and the ring
of axes in the yard, where the peasants were repairing ploughs and harrows. e
real spring had come.

Chapter 
Levin put on his big boots, and, for the ﬁrst time, a cloth jacket, instead of his fur
cloak, and went out to look aer his farm, stepping over streams of water that
ﬂashed in the sunshine and dazzled his eyes, and treading one minute on ice and
the next into sticky mud.
Spring is the time of plans and projects. And, as he came out into the farmyard, Levin, like a tree in spring that knows not what form will be taken by the
young shoots and twigs imprisoned in its swelling buds, hardly knew what undertakings he was going to begin upon now in the farm work that was so dear to him.
But he felt that he was full of the most splendid plans and projects. First of all he
went to the cale. e cows had been let out into their paddock, and their smooth
sides were already shining with their new, sleek, spring coats; they basked in the
sunshine and lowed to go to the meadow. Levin gazed admiringly at the cows he
knew so intimately to the minutest detail of their condition, and gave orders for
them to be driven out into the meadow, and the calves to be let into the paddock.
e herdsman ran gaily to get ready for the meadow. e cowherd girls, picking
up their peicoats, ran splashing through the mud with bare legs, still white, not
yet brown from the sun, waving brush wood in their hands, chasing the calves
that frolicked in the mirth of spring.
Aer admiring the young ones of that year, who were particularly ﬁne—the
early calves were the size of a peasant’s cow, and Pava’s daughter, at three months
old, was as big as a yearling—Levin gave orders for a trough to be brought out and
for them to be fed in the paddock. But it appeared that as the paddock had not
been used during the winter, the hurdles made in the autumn for it were broken.
He sent for the carpenter, who, according to his orders, ought to have been at work
at the thrashing machine. But it appeared that the carpenter was repairing the
harrows, which ought to have been repaired before Lent. is was very annoying
to Levin. It was annoying to come upon that everlasting slovenliness in the farm
work against which he had been striving with all his might for so many years.
e hurdles, as he ascertained, being not wanted in winter, had been carried to
the cart-horses’ stable; and there broken, as they were of light construction, only
meant for feeding calves. Moreover, it was apparent also that the harrows and all

cxl
the agricultural implements, which he had directed to be looked over and repaired
in the winter, for which very purpose he had hired three carpenters, had not been
put into repair, and the harrows were being repaired when they ought to have
been harrowing the ﬁeld. Levin sent for his bailiﬀ, but immediately went oﬀ
himself to look for him. e bailiﬀ, beaming all over, like everyone that day, in a
sheepskin bordered with astrachan, came out of the barn, twisting a bit of straw
in his hands.
"Why isn’t the carpenter at the thrashing machine?"
"Oh, I meant to tell you yesterday, the harrows want repairing. Here it’s
time they got to work in the ﬁelds."
"But what were they doing in the winter, then?"
"But what did you want the carpenter for?"
"Where are the hurdles for the calves’ paddock?"
"I ordered them to be got ready. What would you have with those peasants!"
said the bailiﬀ, with a wave of his hand.
"It’s not those peasants but this bailiﬀ!" said Levin, geing angry. "Why,
what do I keep you for?" he cried. But, bethinking himself that this would not
help maers, he stopped short in the middle of a sentence, and merely sighed.
"Well, what do you say? Can sowing begin?" he asked, aer a pause.
"Behind Turkin tomorrow or the next day they might begin."
"And the clover?"
"I’ve sent Vassily and Mishka; they’re sowing. Only I don’t know if they’ll
manage to get through; it’s so slushy."
"How many acres?"
"About ﬁeen."
"Why not sow all?" cried Levin.
at they were only sowing the clover on ﬁeen acres, not on all the fortyﬁve, was still more annoying to him. Clover, as he knew, both from books and
from his own experience, never did well except when it was sown as early as
possible, almost in the snow. And yet Levin could never get this done.
"ere’s no one to send. What would you have with such a set of peasants?
ree haven’t turned up. And there’s Semyon…"
"Well, you should have taken some men from the thatching."
"And so I have, as it is."
"Where are the peasants, then?"
"Five are making compôte" (which meant compost), "four are shiing the
oats for fear of a touch of mildew, Konstantin Dmitrievitch."
Levin knew very well that "a touch of mildew" meant that his English seed
oats were already ruined. Again they had not done as he had ordered.
"Why, but I told you during Lent to put in pipes," he cried.

cxli
"Don’t put yourself out; we shall get it all done in time."
Levin waved his hand angrily, went into the granary to glance at the oats,
and then to the stable. e oats were not yet spoiled. But the peasants were
carrying the oats in spades when they might simply let them slide down into the
lower granary; and arranging for this to be done, and taking two workmen from
there for sowing clover, Levin got over his vexation with the bailiﬀ. Indeed, it was
such a lovely day that one could not be angry.
"Ignat!" he called to the coachman, who, with his sleeves tucked up, was
washing the carriage wheels, "saddle me…"
"Which, sir?"
"Well, let it be Kolpik."
"Yes, sir."
While they were saddling his horse, Levin again called up the bailiﬀ, who
was hanging about in sight, to make it up with him, and began talking to him
about the spring operations before them, and his plans for the farm.
e wagons were to begin carting manure earlier, so as to get all done before
the early mowing. And the ploughing of the further land to go on without a break
so as to let it ripen lying fallow. And the mowing to be all done by hired labor,
not on half-proﬁts. e bailiﬀ listened aentively, and obviously made an eﬀort
to approve of his employer’s projects. But still he had that look Levin knew so
well that always irritated him, a look of hopelessness and despondency. at look
said: "at’s all very well, but as God wills."
Nothing mortiﬁed Levin so much as that tone. But it was the tone common
to all the bailiﬀs he had ever had. ey had all taken up that aitude to his plans,
and so now he was not angered by it, but mortiﬁed, and felt all the more roused
to struggle against this, as it seemed, elemental force continually ranged against
him, for which he could ﬁnd no other expression than "as God wills."
"If we can manage it, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," said the bailiﬀ.
"Why ever shouldn’t you manage it?"
"We positively must have another ﬁeen laborers. And they don’t turn up.
ere were some here today asking seventy roubles for the summer."
Levin was silent. Again he was brought face to face with that opposing
force. He knew that however much they tried, they could not hire more than
forty—thirty-seven perhaps or thirty-eight—laborers for a reasonable sum. Some
forty had been taken on, and there were no more. But still he could not help
struggling against it.
"Send to Sury, to Tcheﬁrovka; if they don’t come we must look for them."
"Oh, I’ll send, to be sure," said Vassily Fedorovitch despondently. "But there
are the horses, too, they’re not good for much."
"We’ll get some more. I know, of course," Levin added laughing, "you always

cxlii
want to do with as lile and as poor quality as possible; but this year I’m not going
to let you have things your own way. I’ll see to everything myself."
"Why, I don’t think you take much rest as it is. It cheers us up to work under
the master’s eye…"
"So they’re sowing clover behind the Birch Dale? I’ll go and have a look
at them," he said, geing on to the lile bay cob, Kolpik, who was led up by the
coachman.
"You can’t get across the streams, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," the coachman
shouted.
"All right, I’ll go by the forest."
And Levin rode through the slush of the farmyard to the gate and out into
the open country, his good lile horse, aer his long inactivity, stepping out gallantly, snorting over the pools, and asking, as it were, for guidance. If Levin had
felt happy before in the cale pens and farmyard, he felt happier yet in the open
country. Swaying rhythmically with the ambling paces of his good lile cob,
drinking in the warm yet fresh scent of the snow and the air, as he rode through
his forest over the crumbling, wasted snow, still le in parts, and covered with
dissolving tracks, he rejoiced over every tree, with the moss reviving on its bark
and the buds swelling on its shoots. When he came out of the forest, in the immense plain before him, his grass ﬁelds stretched in an unbroken carpet of green,
without one bare place or swamp, only spoed here and there in the hollows with
patches of melting snow. He was not put out of temper even by the sight of the
peasants’ horses and colts trampling down his young grass (he told a peasant he
met to drive them out), nor by the sarcastic and stupid reply of the peasant Ipat,
whom he met on the way, and asked, "Well, Ipat, shall we soon be sowing?" "We
must get the ploughing done ﬁrst, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," answered Ipat. e
further he rode, the happier he became, and plans for the land rose to his mind
each beer than the last; to plant all his ﬁelds with hedges along the southern
borders, so that the snow should not lie under them; to divide them up into six
ﬁelds of arable and three of pasture and hay; to build a cale yard at the further
end of the estate, and to dig a pond and to construct movable pens for the cale
as a means of manuring the land. And then eight hundred acres of wheat, three
hundred of potatoes, and four hundred of clover, and not one acre exhausted.
Absorbed in such dreams, carefully keeping his horse by the hedges, so as
not to trample his young crops, he rode up to the laborers who had been sent to
sow clover. A cart with the seed in it was standing, not at the edge, but in the
middle of the crop, and the winter corn had been torn up by the wheels and trampled by the horse. Both the laborers were siing in the hedge, probably smoking
a pipe together. e earth in the cart, with which the seed was mixed, was not
crushed to powder, but crusted together or adhering in clods. Seeing the master,

cxliii
the laborer, Vassily, went towards the cart, while Mishka set to work sowing. is
was not as it should be, but with the laborers Levin seldom lost his temper. When
Vassily came up, Levin told him to lead the horse to the hedge.
"It’s all right, sir, it’ll spring up again," responded Vassily.
"Please don’t argue," said Levin, "but do as you’re told."
"Yes, sir," answered Vassily, and he took the horse’s head. "What a sowing,
Konstantin Dmitrievitch," he said, hesitating; "ﬁrst rate. Only it’s a work to get
about! You drag a ton of earth on your shoes."
"Why is it you have earth that’s not sied?" said Levin.
"Well, we crumble it up," answered Vassily, taking up some seed and rolling
the earth in his palms.
Vassily was not to blame for their having ﬁlled up his cart with unsied
earth, but still it was annoying.
Levin had more than once already tried a way he knew for stiﬂing his anger,
and turning all that seemed dark right again, and he tried that way now. He
watched how Mishka strode along, swinging the huge clods of earth that clung
to each foot; and geing oﬀ his horse, he took the sieve from Vassily and started
sowing himself.
"Where did you stop?"
Vassily pointed to the mark with his foot, and Levin went forward as best
he could, scaering the seed on the land. Walking was as diﬃcult as on a bog,
and by the time Levin had ended the row he was in a great heat, and he stopped
and gave up the sieve to Vassily.
"Well, master, when summer’s here, mind you don’t scold me for these
rows," said Vassily.
"Eh?" said Levin cheerily, already feeling the eﬀect of his method.
"Why, you’ll see in the summer time. It’ll look diﬀerent. Look you where I
sowed last spring. How I did work at it! I do my best, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,
d’ye see, as I would for my own father. I don’t like bad work myself, nor would I
let another man do it. What’s good for the master’s good for us too. To look out
yonder now," said Vassily, pointing, "it does one’s heart good."
"It’s a lovely spring, Vassily."
"Why, it’s a spring such as the old men don’t remember the like of. I was
up home; an old man up there has sown wheat too, about an acre of it. He was
saying you wouldn’t know it from rye."
"Have you been sowing wheat long?"
"Why, sir, it was you taught us the year before last. You gave me two measures. We sold about eight bushels and sowed a rood."
"Well, mind you crumble up the clods," said Levin, going towards his horse,
"and keep an eye on Mishka. And if there’s a good crop you shall have half a

cxliv
rouble for every acre."
"Humbly thankful. We are very well content, sir, as it is."
Levin got on his horse and rode towards the ﬁeld where was last year’s
clover, and the one which was ploughed ready for the spring corn.
e crop of clover coming up in the stubble was magniﬁcent. It had survived everything, and stood up vividly green through the broken stalks of last
year’s wheat. e horse sank in up to the pasterns, and he drew each hoof with a
sucking sound out of the half-thawed ground. Over the ploughland riding was utterly impossible; the horse could only keep a foothold where there was ice, and in
the thawing furrows he sank deep in at each step. e ploughland was in splendid
condition; in a couple of days it would be ﬁt for harrowing and sowing. Everything was capital, everything was cheering. Levin rode back across the streams,
hoping the water would have gone down. And he did in fact get across, and startled two ducks. "ere must be snipe too," he thought, and just as he reached the
turning homewards he met the forest keeper, who conﬁrmed his theory about the
snipe.
Levin went home at a trot, so as to have time to eat his dinner and get his
gun ready for the evening.

Chapter 
As he rode up to the house in the happiest frame of mind, Levin heard the bell
ring at the side of the principal entrance of the house.
"Yes, that’s someone from the railway station," he thought, "just the time to
be here from the Moscow train … Who could it be? What if it’s brother Nikolay?
He did say: ‘Maybe I’ll go to the waters, or maybe I’ll come down to you.’" He
felt dismayed and vexed for the ﬁrst minute, that his brother Nikolay’s presence
should come to disturb his happy mood of spring. But he felt ashamed of the
feeling, and at once he opened, as it were, the arms of his soul, and with a soened
feeling of joy and expectation, now he hoped with all his heart that it was his
brother. He pricked up his horse, and riding out from behind the acacias he saw a
hired three-horse sledge from the railway station, and a gentleman in a fur coat.
It was not his brother. "Oh, if it were only some nice person one could talk to a
lile!" he thought.
"Ah," cried Levin joyfully, ﬂinging up both his hands. "Here’s a delightful
visitor! Ah, how glad I am to see you!" he shouted, recognizing Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"I shall ﬁnd out for certain whether she’s married, or when she’s going to
be married," he thought. And on that delicious spring day he felt that the thought

cxlv
of her did not hurt him at all.
"Well, you didn’t expect me, eh?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, geing out of
the sledge, splashed with mud on the bridge of his nose, on his cheek, and on
his eyebrows, but radiant with health and good spirits. "I’ve come to see you in
the ﬁrst place," he said, embracing and kissing him, "to have some stand-shooting
second, and to sell the forest at Ergushovo third."
"Delightful! What a spring we’re having! How ever did you get along in a
sledge?"
"In a cart it would have been worse still, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," answered
the driver, who knew him.
"Well, I’m very, very glad to see you," said Levin, with a genuine smile of
childlike delight.
Levin led his friend to the room set apart for visitors, where Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s things were carried also—a bag, a gun in a case, a satchel for cigars.
Leaving him there to wash and change his clothes, Levin went oﬀ to the counting house to speak about the ploughing and clover. Agafea Mihalovna, always
very anxious for the credit of the house, met him in the hall with inquiries about
dinner.
"Do just as you like, only let it be as soon as possible," he said, and went to
the bailiﬀ.
When he came back, Stepan Arkadyevitch, washed and combed, came out
of his room with a beaming smile, and they went upstairs together.
"Well, I am glad I managed to get away to you! Now I shall understand
what the mysterious business is that you are always absorbed in here. No, really,
I envy you. What a house, how nice it all is! So bright, so cheerful!" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, forgeing that it was not always spring and ﬁne weather like that
day. "And your nurse is simply charming! A prey maid in an apron might be
even more agreeable, perhaps; but for your severe monastic style it does very
well."
Stepan Arkadyevitch told him many interesting pieces of news; especially
interesting to Levin was the news that his brother, Sergey Ivanovitch, was intending to pay him a visit in the summer.
Not one word did Stepan Arkadyevitch say in reference to Kiy and the
Shtcherbatskys; he merely gave him greetings from his wife. Levin was grateful to him for his delicacy and was very glad of his visitor. As always happened
with him during his solitude, a mass of ideas and feelings had been accumulating
within him, which he could not communicate to those about him. And now he
poured out upon Stepan Arkadyevitch his poetic joy in the spring, and his failures
and plans for the land, and his thoughts and criticisms on the books he had been
reading, and the idea of his own book, the basis of which really was, though he

cxlvi
was unaware of it himself, a criticism of all the old books on agriculture. Stepan
Arkadyevitch, always charming, understanding everything at the slightest reference, was particularly charming on this visit, and Levin noticed in him a special
tenderness, as it were, and a new tone of respect that ﬂaered him.
e eﬀorts of Agafea Mihalovna and the cook, that the dinner should be particularly good, only ended in the two famished friends aacking the preliminary
course, eating a great deal of bread and buer, salt goose and salted mushrooms,
and in Levin’s ﬁnally ordering the soup to be served without the accompaniment
of lile pies, with which the cook had particularly meant to impress their visitor. But though Stepan Arkadyevitch was accustomed to very diﬀerent dinners,
he thought everything excellent: the herb brandy, and the bread, and the butter, and above all the salt goose and the mushrooms, and the nele soup, and the
chicken in white sauce, and the white Crimean wine—everything was superb and
delicious.
"Splendid, splendid!" he said, lighting a fat cigar aer the roast. "I feel as if,
coming to you, I had landed on a peaceful shore aer the noise and jolting of a
steamer. And so you maintain that the laborer himself is an element to be studied
and to regulate the choice of methods in agriculture. Of course, I’m an ignorant
outsider; but I should fancy theory and its application will have its inﬂuence on
the laborer too."
"Yes, but wait a bit. I’m not talking of political economy, I’m talking of the
science of agriculture. It ought to be like the natural sciences, and to observe
given phenomena and the laborer in his economic, ethnographical…"
At that instant Agafea Mihalovna came in with jam.
"Oh, Agafea Mihalovna," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, kissing the tips of his
plump ﬁngers, "what salt goose, what herb brandy!… What do you think, isn’t it
time to start, Kostya?" he added.
Levin looked out of the window at the sun sinking behind the bare tree-tops
of the forest.
"Yes, it’s time," he said. "Kouzma, get ready the trap," and he ran downstairs.
Stepan Arkadyevitch, going down, carefully took the canvas cover oﬀ his
varnished gun case with his own hands, and opening it, began to get ready his
expensive new-fashioned gun. Kouzma, who already scented a big tip, never le
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s side, and put on him both his stockings and boots, a task
which Stepan Arkadyevitch readily le him.
"Kostya, give orders that if the merchant Ryabinin comes … I told him to
come today, he’s to be brought in and to wait for me…"
"Why, do you mean to say you’re selling the forest to Ryabinin?"
"Yes. Do you know him?"
"To be sure I do. I have had to do business with him, ‘positively and con-

cxlvii
clusively.’"
Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed. "Positively and conclusively" were the merchant’s favorite words.
"Yes, it’s wonderfully funny the way he talks. She knows where her master’s
going!" he added, paing Laska, who hung about Levin, whining and licking his
hands, his boots, and his gun.
e trap was already at the steps when they went out.
"I told them to bring the trap round; or would you rather walk?"
"No, we’d beer drive," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, geing into the trap. He
sat down, tucked the tiger-skin rug round him, and lighted a cigar. "How is it you
don’t smoke? A cigar is a sort of thing, not exactly a pleasure, but the crown and
outward sign of pleasure. Come, this is life! How splendid it is! is is how I
should like to live!"
"Why, who prevents you?" said Levin, smiling.
"No, you’re a lucky man! You’ve got everything you like. You like
horses—and you have them; dogs—you have them; shooting—you have it; farming—you have it."
"Perhaps because I rejoice in what I have, and don’t fret for what I haven’t,"
said Levin, thinking of Kiy.
Stepan Arkadyevitch comprehended, looked at him, but said nothing.
Levin was grateful to Oblonsky for noticing, with his never-failing tact, that
he dreaded conversation about the Shtcherbatskys, and so saying nothing about
them. But now Levin was longing to ﬁnd out what was tormenting him so, yet
he had not the courage to begin.
"Come, tell me how things are going with you," said Levin, bethinking himself that it was not nice of him to think only of himself.
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes sparkled merrily.
"You don’t admit, I know, that one can be fond of new rolls when one has
had one’s rations of bread—to your mind it’s a crime; but I don’t count life as
life without love," he said, taking Levin’s question his own way. "What am I to
do? I’m made that way. And really, one does so lile harm to anyone, and gives
oneself so much pleasure…"
"What! is there something new, then?" queried Levin.
"Yes, my boy, there is! ere, do you see, you know the type of Ossian’s
women…. Women, such as one sees in dreams…. Well, these women are sometimes to be met in reality … and these women are terrible. Woman, don’t you
know, is such a subject that however much you study it, it’s always perfectly
new."
"Well, then, it would be beer not to study it."
"No. Some mathematician has said that enjoyment lies in the search for

cxlviii
truth, not in the ﬁnding it."
Levin listened in silence, and in spite of all the eﬀorts he made, he could not
in the least enter into the feelings of his friend and understand his sentiments and
the charm of studying such women.

Chapter 
e place ﬁxed on for the stand-shooting was not far above a stream in a lile
aspen copse. On reaching the copse, Levin got out of the trap and led Oblonsky
to a corner of a mossy, swampy glade, already quite free from snow. He went
back himself to a double birch tree on the other side, and leaning his gun on the
fork of a dead lower branch, he took oﬀ his full overcoat, fastened his belt again,
and worked his arms to see if they were free.
Gray old Laska, who had followed them, sat down warily opposite him and
pricked up her ears. e sun was seing behind a thick forest, and in the glow
of sunset the birch trees, doed about in the aspen copse, stood out clearly with
their hanging twigs, and their buds swollen almost to bursting.
From the thickest parts of the copse, where the snow still remained, came
the faint sound of narrow winding threads of water running away. Tiny birds
twiered, and now and then ﬂuered from tree to tree.
In the pauses of complete stillness there came the rustle of last year’s leaves,
stirred by the thawing of the earth and the growth of the grass.
"Imagine! One can hear and see the grass growing!" Levin said to himself,
noticing a wet, slate-colored aspen leaf moving beside a blade of young grass. He
stood, listened, and gazed sometimes down at the wet mossy ground, sometimes
at Laska listening all alert, sometimes at the sea of bare tree tops that stretched on
the slope below him, sometimes at the darkening sky, covered with white streaks
of cloud.
A hawk ﬂew high over a forest far away with slow sweep of its wings;
another ﬂew with exactly the same motion in the same direction and vanished.
e birds twiered more and more loudly and busily in the thicket. An owl hooted
not far oﬀ, and Laska, starting, stepped cautiously a few steps forward, and puing
her head on one side, began to listen intently. Beyond the stream was heard the
cuckoo. Twice she uered her usual cuckoo call, and then gave a hoarse, hurried
call and broke down.
"Imagine! the cuckoo already!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, coming out from
behind a bush.
"Yes, I hear it," answered Levin, reluctantly breaking the stillness with his
voice, which sounded disagreeable to himself. "Now it’s coming!"

cxlix
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s ﬁgure again went behind the bush, and Levin saw
nothing but the bright ﬂash of a match, followed by the red glow and blue smoke
of a cigaree.
"Tchk! tchk!" came the snapping sound of Stepan Arkadyevitch cocking his
gun.
"What’s that cry?" asked Oblonsky, drawing Levin’s aention to a prolonged cry, as though a colt were whinnying in a high voice, in play.
"Oh, don’t you know it? at’s the hare. But enough talking! Listen, it’s
ﬂying!" almost shrieked Levin, cocking his gun.
ey heard a shrill whistle in the distance, and in the exact time, so well
known to the sportsman, two seconds later—another, a third, and aer the third
whistle the hoarse, guural cry could be heard.
Levin looked about him to right and to le, and there, just facing him against
the dusky blue sky above the confused mass of tender shoots of the aspens, he saw
the ﬂying bird. It was ﬂying straight towards him; the guural cry, like the even
tearing of some strong stuﬀ, sounded close to his ear; the long beak and neck
of the bird could be seen, and at the very instant when Levin was taking aim,
behind the bush where Oblonsky stood, there was a ﬂash of red lightning: the
bird dropped like an arrow, and darted upwards again. Again came the red ﬂash
and the sound of a blow, and ﬂuering its wings as though trying to keep up in
the air, the bird halted, stopped still an instant, and fell with a heavy splash on
the slushy ground.
"Can I have missed it?" shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch, who could not see for
the smoke.
"Here it is!" said Levin, pointing to Laska, who with one ear raised, wagging
the end of her shaggy tail, came slowly back as though she would prolong the
pleasure, and as it were smiling, brought the dead bird to her master. "Well, I’m
glad you were successful," said Levin, who, at the same time, had a sense of envy
that he had not succeeded in shooting the snipe.
"It was a bad shot from the right barrel," responded Stepan Arkadyevitch,
loading his gun. "Sh… it’s ﬂying!"
e shrill whistles rapidly following one another were heard again. Two
snipe, playing and chasing one another, and only whistling, not crying, ﬂew
straight at the very heads of the sportsmen. ere was the report of four shots,
and like swallows the snipe turned swi somersaults in the air and vanished from
sight.
e stand-shooting was capital. Stepan Arkadyevitch shot two more birds
and Levin two, of which one was not found. It began to get dark. Venus, bright
and silvery, shone with her so light low down in the west behind the birch trees,
and high up in the east twinkled the red lights of Arcturus. Over his head Levin

cl
made out the stars of the Great Bear and lost them again. e snipe had ceased
ﬂying; but Levin resolved to stay a lile longer, till Venus, which he saw below
a branch of birch, should be above it, and the stars of the Great Bear should be
perfectly plain. Venus had risen above the branch, and the ear of the Great Bear
with its sha was now all plainly visible against the dark blue sky, yet still he
waited.
"Isn’t it time to go home?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
It was quite still now in the copse, and not a bird was stirring.
"Let’s stay a lile while," answered Levin.
"As you like."
ey were standing now about ﬁeen paces from one another.
"Stiva!" said Levin unexpectedly; "how is it you don’t tell me whether your
sister-in-law’s married yet, or when she’s going to be?"
Levin felt so resolute and serene that no answer, he fancied, could aﬀect
him. But he had never dreamed of what Stepan Arkadyevitch replied.
"She’s never thought of being married, and isn’t thinking of it; but she’s
very ill, and the doctors have sent her abroad. ey’re positively afraid she may
not live."
"What!" cried Levin. "Very ill? What is wrong with her? How has she…?"
While they were saying this, Laska, with ears pricked up, was looking upwards at the sky, and reproachfully at them.
"ey have chosen a time to talk," she was thinking. "It’s on the wing….
Here it is, yes, it is. ey’ll miss it," thought Laska.
But at that very instant both suddenly heard a shrill whistle which, as it
were, smote on their ears, and both suddenly seized their guns and two ﬂashes
gleamed, and two bangs sounded at the very same instant. e snipe ﬂying high
above instantly folded its wings and fell into a thicket, bending down the delicate
shoots.
"Splendid! Together!" cried Levin, and he ran with Laska into the thicket to
look for the snipe.
"Oh, yes, what was it that was unpleasant?" he wondered. "Yes, Kiy’s ill….
Well, it can’t be helped; I’m very sorry," he thought.
"She’s found it! Isn’t she a clever thing?" he said, taking the warm bird from
Laska’s mouth and packing it into the almost full game bag. "I’ve got it, Stiva!" he
shouted.

Chapter 
On the way home Levin asked all details of Kiy’s illness and the Shtcherbatskys’

cli
plans, and though he would have been ashamed to admit it, he was pleased at
what he heard. He was pleased that there was still hope, and still more pleased
that she should be suﬀering who had made him suﬀer so much. But when Stepan
Arkadyevitch began to speak of the causes of Kiy’s illness, and mentioned Vronsky’s name, Levin cut him short.
"I have no right whatever to know family maers, and, to tell the truth, no
interest in them either."
Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled hardly perceptibly, catching the instantaneous
change he knew so well in Levin’s face, which had become as gloomy as it had
been bright a minute before.
"Have you quite seled about the forest with Ryabinin?" asked Levin.
"Yes, it’s seled. e price is magniﬁcent; thirty-eight thousand. Eight
straight away, and the rest in six years. I’ve been bothering about it for ever
so long. No one would give more."
"en you’ve as good as given away your forest for nothing," said Levin
gloomily.
"How do you mean for nothing?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a goodhumored smile, knowing that nothing would be right in Levin’s eyes now.
"Because the forest is worth at least a hundred and ﬁy roubles the acre,"
answered Levin.
"Oh, these farmers!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch playfully. "Your tone of contempt for us poor townsfolk!… But when it comes to business, we do it beer than
anyone. I assure you I have reckoned it all out," he said, "and the forest is fetching
a very good price—so much so that I’m afraid of this fellow’s crying oﬀ, in fact.
You know it’s not ‘timber,’" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, hoping by this distinction
to convince Levin completely of the unfairness of his doubts. "And it won’t run
to more than twenty-ﬁve yards of fagots per acre, and he’s giving me at the rate
of seventy roubles the acre."
Levin smiled contemptuously. "I know," he thought, "that fashion not only
in him, but in all city people, who, aer being twice in ten years in the country,
pick up two or three phrases and use them in season and out of season, ﬁrmly
persuaded that they know all about it. ‘Timber, run to so many yards the acre.’ He
says those words without understanding them himself."
"I wouldn’t aempt to teach you what you write about in your oﬃce," said
he, "and if need arose, I should come to you to ask about it. But you’re so positive
you know all the lore of the forest. It’s diﬃcult. Have you counted the trees?"
"How count the trees?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing, still trying to
draw his friend out of his ill-temper. "Count the sands of the sea, number the
stars. Some higher power might do it."
"Oh, well, the higher power of Ryabinin can. Not a single merchant ever

clii
buys a forest without counting the trees, unless they get it given them for nothing,
as you’re doing now. I know your forest. I go there every year shooting, and your
forest’s worth a hundred and ﬁy roubles an acre paid down, while he’s giving
you sixty by installments. So that in fact you’re making him a present of thirty
thousand."
"Come, don’t let your imagination run away with you," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch piteously. "Why was it none would give it, then?"
"Why, because he has an understanding with the merchants; he’s bought
them oﬀ. I’ve had to do with all of them; I know them. ey’re not merchants,
you know: they’re speculators. He wouldn’t look at a bargain that gave him ten,
ﬁeen per cent proﬁt, but holds back to buy a rouble’s worth for twenty kopecks."
"Well, enough of it! You’re out of temper."
"Not the least," said Levin gloomily, as they drove up to the house.
At the steps there stood a trap tightly covered with iron and leather, with a
sleek horse tightly harnessed with broad collar-straps. In the trap sat the chubby,
tightly belted clerk who served Ryabinin as coachman. Ryabinin himself was
already in the house, and met the friends in the hall. Ryabinin was a tall, thinnish, middle-aged man, with mustache and a projecting clean-shaven chin, and
prominent muddy-looking eyes. He was dressed in a long-skirted blue coat, with
buons below the waist at the back, and wore high boots wrinkled over the ankles and straight over the calf, with big galoshes drawn over them. He rubbed
his face with his handkerchief, and wrapping round him his coat, which sat extremely well as it was, he greeted them with a smile, holding out his hand to
Stepan Arkadyevitch, as though he wanted to catch something.
"So here you are," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, giving him his hand. "at’s
capital."
"I did not venture to disregard your excellency’s commands, though the
road was extremely bad. I positively walked the whole way, but I am here at my
time. Konstantin Dmitrievitch, my respects"; he turned to Levin, trying to seize
his hand too. But Levin, scowling, made as though he did not notice his hand, and
took out the snipe. "Your honors have been diverting yourselves with the chase?
What kind of bird may it be, pray?" added Ryabinin, looking contemptuously at
the snipe: "a great delicacy, I suppose." And he shook his head disapprovingly, as
though he had grave doubts whether this game were worth the candle.
"Would you like to go into my study?" Levin said in French to Stepan
Arkadyevitch, scowling morosely. "Go into my study; you can talk there."
"ite so, where you please," said Ryabinin with contemptuous dignity, as
though wishing to make it felt that others might be in diﬃculties as to how to
behave, but that he could never be in any diﬃculty about anything.
On entering the study Ryabinin looked about, as his habit was, as though

cliii
seeking the holy picture, but when he had found it, he did not cross himself.
He scanned the bookcases and bookshelves, and with the same dubious air with
which he had regarded the snipe, he smiled contemptuously and shook his head
disapprovingly, as though by no means willing to allow that this game were worth
the candle.
"Well, have you brought the money?" asked Oblonsky. "Sit down."
"Oh, don’t trouble about the money. I’ve come to see you to talk it over."
"What is there to talk over? But do sit down."
"I don’t mind if I do," said Ryabinin, siing down and leaning his elbows on
the back of his chair in a position of the intensest discomfort to himself. "You must
knock it down a bit, prince. It would be too bad. e money is ready conclusively
to the last farthing. As to paying the money down, there’ll be no hitch there."
Levin, who had meanwhile been puing his gun away in the cupboard, was
just going out of the door, but catching the merchant’s words, he stopped.
"Why, you’ve got the forest for nothing as it is," he said. "He came to me
too late, or I’d have ﬁxed the price for him."
Ryabinin got up, and in silence, with a smile, he looked Levin down and up.
"Very close about money is Konstantin Dmitrievitch," he said with a smile,
turning to Stepan Arkadyevitch; "there’s positively no dealing with him. I was
bargaining for some wheat of him, and a prey price I oﬀered too."
"Why should I give you my goods for nothing? I didn’t pick it up on the
ground, nor steal it either."
"Mercy on us! nowadays there’s no chance at all of stealing. With the open
courts and everything done in style, nowadays there’s no question of stealing. We
are just talking things over like gentlemen. His excellency’s asking too much for
the forest. I can’t make both ends meet over it. I must ask for a lile concession."
"But is the thing seled between you or not? If it’s seled, it’s useless haggling; but if it’s not," said Levin, "I’ll buy the forest."
e smile vanished at once from Ryabinin’s face. A hawklike, greedy, cruel
expression was le upon it. With rapid, bony ﬁngers he unbuoned his coat,
revealing a shirt, bronze waistcoat buons, and a watch chain, and quickly pulled
out a fat old pocketbook.
"Here you are, the forest is mine," he said, crossing himself quickly, and
holding out his hand. "Take the money; it’s my forest. at’s Ryabinin’s way of
doing business; he doesn’t haggle over every half-penny," he added, scowling and
waving the pocketbook.
"I wouldn’t be in a hurry if I were you," said Levin.
"Come, really," said Oblonsky in surprise. "I’ve given my word, you know."
Levin went out of the room, slamming the door. Ryabinin looked towards
the door and shook his head with a smile.

cliv
"It’s all youthfulness—positively nothing but boyishness. Why, I’m buying
it, upon my honor, simply, believe me, for the glory of it, that Ryabinin, and no one
else, should have bought the copse of Oblonsky. And as to the proﬁts, why, I must
make what God gives. In God’s name. If you would kindly sign the title-deed…"
Within an hour the merchant, stroking his big overcoat neatly down, and
hooking up his jacket, with the agreement in his pocket, seated himself in his
tightly covered trap, and drove homewards.
"Ugh, these gentlefolks!" he said to the clerk. "ey—they’re a nice lot!"
"at’s so," responded the clerk, handing him the reins and buoning the
leather apron. "But I can congratulate you on the purchase, Mihail Ignatitch?"
"Well, well…"

Chapter 
Stepan Arkadyevitch went upstairs with his pocket bulging with notes, which the
merchant had paid him for three months in advance. e business of the forest
was over, the money in his pocket; their shooting had been excellent, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch was in the happiest frame of mind, and so he felt specially anxious
to dissipate the ill-humor that had come upon Levin. He wanted to ﬁnish the day
at supper as pleasantly as it had been begun.
Levin certainly was out of humor, and in spite of all his desire to be aﬀectionate and cordial to his charming visitor, he could not control his mood. e
intoxication of the news that Kiy was not married had gradually begun to work
upon him.
Kiy was not married, but ill, and ill from love for a man who had slighted
her. is slight, as it were, rebounded upon him. Vronsky had slighted her, and
she had slighted him, Levin. Consequently Vronsky had the right to despise Levin,
and therefore he was his enemy. But all this Levin did not think out. He vaguely
felt that there was something in it insulting to him, and he was not angry now at
what had disturbed him, but he fell foul of everything that presented itself. e
stupid sale of the forest, the fraud practiced upon Oblonsky and concluded in his
house, exasperated him.
"Well, ﬁnished?" he said, meeting Stepan Arkadyevitch upstairs. "Would
you like supper?"
"Well, I wouldn’t say no to it. What an appetite I get in the country! Wonderful! Why didn’t you oﬀer Ryabinin something?"
"Oh, damn him!"
"Still, how you do treat him!" said Oblonsky. "You didn’t even shake hands
with him. Why not shake hands with him?"

clv
"Because I don’t shake hands with a waiter, and a waiter’s a hundred times
beer than he is."
"What a reactionist you are, really! What about the amalgamation of
classes?" said Oblonsky.
"Anyone who likes amalgamating is welcome to it, but it sickens me."
"You’re a regular reactionist, I see."
"Really, I have never considered what I am. I am Konstantin Levin, and
nothing else."
"And Konstantin Levin very much out of temper," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
smiling.
"Yes, I am out of temper, and do you know why? Because—excuse me—of
your stupid sale…"
Stepan Arkadyevitch frowned good-humoredly, like one who feels himself
teased and aacked for no fault of his own.
"Come, enough about it!" he said. "When did anybody ever sell anything
without being told immediately aer the sale, ‘It was worth much more’? But
when one wants to sell, no one will give anything…. No, I see you’ve a grudge
against that unlucky Ryabinin."
"Maybe I have. And do you know why? You’ll say again that I’m a reactionist, or some other terrible word; but all the same it does annoy and anger me to
see on all sides the impoverishing of the nobility to which I belong, and, in spite
of the amalgamation of classes, I’m glad to belong. And their impoverishment is
not due to extravagance—that would be nothing; living in good style—that’s the
proper thing for noblemen; it’s only the nobles who know how to do it. Now the
peasants about us buy land, and I don’t mind that. e gentleman does nothing,
while the peasant works and supplants the idle man. at’s as it ought to be. And
I’m very glad for the peasant. But I do mind seeing the process of impoverishment
from a sort of—I don’t know what to call it—innocence. Here a Polish speculator
bought for half its value a magniﬁcent estate from a young lady who lives in Nice.
And there a merchant will get three acres of land, worth ten roubles, as security
for the loan of one rouble. Here, for no kind of reason, you’ve made that rascal a
present of thirty thousand roubles."
"Well, what should I have done? Counted every tree?"
"Of course, they must be counted. You didn’t count them, but Ryabinin
did. Ryabinin’s children will have means of livelihood and education, while yours
maybe will not!"
"Well, you must excuse me, but there’s something mean in this counting. We
have our business and they have theirs, and they must make their proﬁt. Anyway,
the thing’s done, and there’s an end of it. And here come some poached eggs, my
favorite dish. And Agafea Mihalovna will give us that marvelous herb-brandy…"

clvi
Stepan Arkadyevitch sat down at the table and began joking with Agafea
Mihalovna, assuring her that it was long since he had tasted such a dinner and
such a supper.
"Well, you do praise it, anyway," said Agafea Mihalovna, "but Konstantin
Dmitrievitch, give him what you will—a crust of bread—he’ll eat it and walk away."
ough Levin tried to control himself, he was gloomy and silent. He wanted
to put one question to Stepan Arkadyevitch, but he could not bring himself to the
point, and could not ﬁnd the words or the moment in which to put it. Stepan
Arkadyevitch had gone down to his room, undressed, again washed, and aired
in a nightshirt with goﬀered frills, he had got into bed, but Levin still lingered in
his room, talking of various triﬂing maers, and not daring to ask what he wanted
to know.
"How wonderfully they make this soap," he said gazing at a piece of soap he
was handling, which Agafea Mihalovna had put ready for the visitor but Oblonsky
had not used. "Only look; why, it’s a work of art."
"Yes, everything’s brought to such a pitch of perfection nowadays," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, with a moist and blissful yawn. "e theater, for instance,
and the entertainments … a—a—a!" he yawned. "e electric light everywhere …
a—a—a!"
"Yes, the electric light," said Levin. "Yes. Oh, and where’s Vronsky now?" he
asked suddenly, laying down the soap.
"Vronsky?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, checking his yawn; "he’s in Petersburg. He le soon aer you did, and he’s not once been in Moscow since. And
do you know, Kostya, I’ll tell you the truth," he went on, leaning his elbow on
the table, and propping on his hand his handsome ruddy face, in which his moist,
good-natured, sleepy eyes shone like stars. "It’s your own fault. You took fright
at the sight of your rival. But, as I told you at the time, I couldn’t say which had
the beer chance. Why didn’t you ﬁght it out? I told you at the time that…." He
yawned inwardly, without opening his mouth.
"Does he know, or doesn’t he, that I did make an oﬀer?" Levin wondered,
gazing at him. "Yes, there’s something humbugging, diplomatic in his face," and
feeling he was blushing, he looked Stepan Arkadyevitch straight in the face without speaking.
"If there was anything on her side at the time, it was nothing but a superﬁcial araction," pursued Oblonsky. "His being such a perfect aristocrat, don’t you
know, and his future position in society, had an inﬂuence not with her, but with
her mother."
Levin scowled. e humiliation of his rejection stung him to the heart, as
though it were a fresh wound he had only just received. But he was at home, and
the walls of home are a support.

clvii
"Stay, stay," he began, interrupting Oblonsky. "You talk of his being an aristocrat. But allow me to ask what it consists in, that aristocracy of Vronsky or of
anybody else, beside which I can be looked down upon? You consider Vronsky
an aristocrat, but I don’t. A man whose father crawled up from nothing at all by
intrigue, and whose mother—God knows whom she wasn’t mixed up with…. No,
excuse me, but I consider myself aristocratic, and people like me, who can point
back in the past to three or four honorable generations of their family, of the highest degree of breeding (talent and intellect, of course that’s another maer), and
have never curried favor with anyone, never depended on anyone for anything,
like my father and my grandfather. And I know many such. You think it mean of
me to count the trees in my forest, while you make Ryabinin a present of thirty
thousand; but you get rents from your lands and I don’t know what, while I don’t
and so I prize what’s come to me from my ancestors or been won by hard work….
We are aristocrats, and not those who can only exist by favor of the powerful of
this world, and who can be bought for twopence halfpenny."
"Well, but whom are you aacking? I agree with you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, sincerely and genially; though he was aware that in the class of those who
could be bought for twopence halfpenny Levin was reckoning him too. Levin’s
warmth gave him genuine pleasure. "Whom are you aacking? ough a good
deal is not true that you say about Vronsky, but I won’t talk about that. I tell you
straight out, if I were you, I should go back with me to Moscow, and…"
"No; I don’t know whether you know it or not, but I don’t care. And I tell
you—I did make an oﬀer and was rejected, and Katerina Alexandrovna is nothing
now to me but a painful and humiliating reminiscence."
"What ever for? What nonsense!"
"But we won’t talk about it. Please forgive me, if I’ve been nasty," said Levin.
Now that he had opened his heart, he became as he had been in the morning.
"You’re not angry with me, Stiva? Please don’t be angry," he said, and smiling, he
took his hand.
"Of course not; not a bit, and no reason to be. I’m glad we’ve spoken openly.
And do you know, stand-shooting in the morning is unusually good—why not go?
I couldn’t sleep the night anyway, but I might go straight from shooting to the
station."
"Capital."

Chapter 
Although all Vronsky’s inner life was absorbed in his passion, his external life
unalterably and inevitably followed along the old accustomed lines of his social

clviii
and regimental ties and interests. e interests of his regiment took an important
place in Vronsky’s life, both because he was fond of the regiment, and because the
regiment was fond of him. ey were not only fond of Vronsky in his regiment,
they respected him too, and were proud of him; proud that this man, with his
immense wealth, his brilliant education and abilities, and the path open before
him to every kind of success, distinction, and ambition, had disregarded all that,
and of all the interests of life had the interests of his regiment and his comrades
nearest to his heart. Vronsky was aware of his comrades’ view of him, and in
addition to his liking for the life, he felt bound to keep up that reputation.
It need not be said that he did not speak of his love to any of his comrades,
nor did he betray his secret even in the wildest drinking bouts (though indeed
he was never so drunk as to lose all control of himsel). And he shut up any of
his thoughtless comrades who aempted to allude to his connection. But in spite
of that, his love was known to all the town; everyone guessed with more or less
conﬁdence at his relations with Madame Karenina. e majority of the younger
men envied him for just what was the most irksome factor in his love—the exalted
position of Karenin, and the consequent publicity of their connection in society.
e greater number of the young women, who envied Anna and had long
been weary of hearing her called virtuous, rejoiced at the fulﬁllment of their predictions, and were only waiting for a decisive turn in public opinion to fall upon
her with all the weight of their scorn. ey were already making ready their handfuls of mud to ﬂing at her when the right moment arrived. e greater number
of the middle-aged people and certain great personages were displeased at the
prospect of the impending scandal in society.
Vronsky’s mother, on hearing of his connection, was at ﬁrst pleased at it,
because nothing to her mind gave such a ﬁnishing touch to a brilliant young man
as a liaison in the highest society; she was pleased, too, that Madame Karenina,
who had so taken her fancy, and had talked so much of her son, was, aer all, just
like all other prey and well-bred women,—at least according to the Countess
Vronskaya’s ideas. But she had heard of late that her son had refused a position
oﬀered him of great importance to his career, simply in order to remain in the
regiment, where he could be constantly seeing Madame Karenina. She learned
that great personages were displeased with him on this account, and she changed
her opinion. She was vexed, too, that from all she could learn of this connection it
was not that brilliant, graceful, worldly liaison which she would have welcomed,
but a sort of Wertherish, desperate passion, so she was told, which might well
lead him into imprudence. She had not seen him since his abrupt departure from
Moscow, and she sent her elder son to bid him come to see her.
is elder son, too, was displeased with his younger brother. He did not
distinguish what sort of love his might be, big or lile, passionate or passionless,

clix
lasting or passing (he kept a ballet girl himself, though he was the father of a
family, so he was lenient in these maers), but he knew that this love aﬀair was
viewed with displeasure by those whom it was necessary to please, and therefore
he did not approve of his brother’s conduct.
Besides the service and society, Vronsky had another great interest—horses;
he was passionately fond of horses.
at year races and a steeplechase had been arranged for the oﬃcers. Vronsky had put his name down, bought a thoroughbred English mare, and in spite of
his love aﬀair, he was looking forward to the races with intense, though reserved,
excitement…
ese two passions did not interfere with one another. On the contrary, he
needed occupation and distraction quite apart from his love, so as to recruit and
rest himself from the violent emotions that agitated him.

Chapter 
On the day of the races at Krasnoe Selo, Vronsky had come earlier than usual to
eat beefsteak in the common messroom of the regiment. He had no need to be
strict with himself, as he had very quickly been brought down to the required light
weight; but still he had to avoid gaining ﬂesh, and so he eschewed farinaceous and
sweet dishes. He sat with his coat unbuoned over a white waistcoat, resting both
elbows on the table, and while waiting for the steak he had ordered he looked at a
French novel that lay open on his plate. He was only looking at the book to avoid
conversation with the oﬃcers coming in and out; he was thinking.
He was thinking of Anna’s promise to see him that day aer the races. But
he had not seen her for three days, and as her husband had just returned from
abroad, he did not know whether she would be able to meet him today or not,
and he did not know how to ﬁnd out. He had had his last interview with her at
his cousin Betsy’s summer villa. He visited the Karenins’ summer villa as rarely
as possible. Now he wanted to go there, and he pondered the question how to do
it.
"Of course I shall say Betsy has sent me to ask whether she’s coming to the
races. Of course, I’ll go," he decided, liing his head from the book. And as he
vividly pictured the happiness of seeing her, his face lighted up.
"Send to my house, and tell them to have out the carriage and three horses
as quick as they can," he said to the servant, who handed him the steak on a hot
silver dish, and moving the dish up he began eating.
From the billiard room next door came the sound of balls knocking, of talk
and laughter. Two oﬃcers appeared at the entrance-door: one, a young fellow,

clx
with a feeble, delicate face, who had lately joined the regiment from the Corps of
Pages; the other, a plump, elderly oﬃcer, with a bracelet on his wrist, and lile
eyes, lost in fat.
Vronsky glanced at them, frowned, and looking down at his book as though
he had not noticed them, he proceeded to eat and read at the same time.
"What? Fortifying yourself for your work?" said the plump oﬃcer, siing
down beside him.
"As you see," responded Vronsky, kniing his brows, wiping his mouth, and
not looking at the oﬃcer.
"So you’re not afraid of geing fat?" said the laer, turning a chair round
for the young oﬃcer.
"What?" said Vronsky angrily, making a wry face of disgust, and showing
his even teeth.
"You’re not afraid of geing fat?"
"Waiter, sherry!" said Vronsky, without replying, and moving the book to
the other side of him, he went on reading.
e plump oﬃcer took up the list of wines and turned to the young oﬃcer.
"You choose what we’re to drink," he said, handing him the card, and looking
at him.
"Rhine wine, please," said the young oﬃcer, stealing a timid glance at Vronsky, and trying to pull his scarcely visible mustache. Seeing that Vronsky did not
turn round, the young oﬃcer got up.
"Let’s go into the billiard room," he said.
e plump oﬃcer rose submissively, and they moved towards the door.
At that moment there walked into the room the tall and well-built Captain
Yashvin. Nodding with an air of loy contempt to the two oﬃcers, he went up to
Vronsky.
"Ah! here he is!" he cried, bringing his big hand down heavily on his epaulet.
Vronsky looked round angrily, but his face lighted up immediately with his characteristic expression of genial and manly serenity.
"at’s it, Alexey," said the captain, in his loud baritone. "You must just eat
a mouthful, now, and drink only one tiny glass."
"Oh, I’m not hungry."
"ere go the inseparables," Yashvin dropped, glancing sarcastically at the
two oﬃcers who were at that instant leaving the room. And he bent his long legs,
swathed in tight riding breeches, and sat down in the chair, too low for him, so
that his knees were cramped up in a sharp angle.
"Why didn’t you turn up at the Red eater yesterday? Numerova wasn’t
at all bad. Where were you?"
"I was late at the Tverskoys’," said Vronsky.

clxi
"Ah!" responded Yashvin.
Yashvin, a gambler and a rake, a man not merely without moral principles,
but of immoral principles, Yashvin was Vronsky’s greatest friend in the regiment.
Vronsky liked him both for his exceptional physical strength, which he showed for
the most part by being able to drink like a ﬁsh, and do without sleep without being
in the slightest degree aﬀected by it; and for his great strength of character, which
he showed in his relations with his comrades and superior oﬃcers, commanding
both fear and respect, and also at cards, when he would play for tens of thousands
and however much he might have drunk, always with such skill and decision that
he was reckoned the best player in the English Club. Vronsky respected and liked
Yashvin particularly because he felt Yashvin liked him, not for his name and his
money, but for himself. And of all men he was the only one with whom Vronsky
would have liked to speak of his love. He felt that Yashvin, in spite of his apparent
contempt for every sort of feeling, was the only man who could, so he fancied,
comprehend the intense passion which now ﬁlled his whole life. Moreover, he
felt certain that Yashvin, as it was, took no delight in gossip and scandal, and
interpreted his feeling rightly, that is to say, knew and believed that this passion
was not a jest, not a pastime, but something more serious and important.
Vronsky had never spoken to him of his passion, but he was aware that he
knew all about it, and that he put the right interpretation on it, and he was glad
to see that in his eyes.
"Ah! yes," he said, to the announcement that Vronsky had been at the Tverskoys’; and his black eyes shining, he plucked at his le mustache, and began
twisting it into his mouth, a bad habit he had.
"Well, and what did you do yesterday? Win anything?" asked Vronsky.
"Eight thousand. But three don’t count; he won’t pay up."
"Oh, then you can aﬀord to lose over me," said Vronsky, laughing. (Yashvin
had bet heavily on Vronsky in the races.)
"No chance of my losing. Mahotin’s the only one that’s risky."
And the conversation passed to forecasts of the coming race, the only thing
Vronsky could think of just now.
"Come along, I’ve ﬁnished," said Vronsky, and geing up he went to the
door. Yashvin got up too, stretching his long legs and his long back.
"It’s too early for me to dine, but I must have a drink. I’ll come along directly.
Hi, wine!" he shouted, in his rich voice, that always rang out so loudly at drill, and
set the windows shaking now.
"No, all right," he shouted again immediately aer. "You’re going home, so
I’ll go with you."
And he walked out with Vronsky.

clxii

Chapter 
Vronsky was staying in a roomy, clean, Finnish hut, divided into two by a partition. Petritsky lived with him in camp too. Petritsky was asleep when Vronsky
and Yashvin came into the hut.
"Get up, don’t go on sleeping," said Yashvin, going behind the partition and
giving Petritsky, who was lying with ruﬄed hair and with his nose in the pillow,
a prod on the shoulder.
Petritsky jumped up suddenly onto his knees and looked round.
"Your brother’s been here," he said to Vronsky. "He waked me up, damn him,
and said he’d look in again." And pulling up the rug he ﬂung himself back on the
pillow. "Oh, do shut up, Yashvin!" he said, geing furious with Yashvin, who was
pulling the rug oﬀ him. "Shut up!" He turned over and opened his eyes. "You’d
beer tell me what to drink; such a nasty taste in my mouth, that…"
"Brandy’s beer than anything," boomed Yashvin. "Tereshtchenko! brandy
for your master and cucumbers," he shouted, obviously taking pleasure in the
sound of his own voice.
"Brandy, do you think? Eh?" queried Petritsky, blinking and rubbing his
eyes. "And you’ll drink something? All right then, we’ll have a drink together!
Vronsky, have a drink?" said Petritsky, geing up and wrapping the tiger-skin
rug round him. He went to the door of the partition wall, raised his hands, and
hummed in French, "ere was a king in ule." "Vronsky, will you have a drink?"
"Go along," said Vronsky, puing on the coat his valet handed to him.
"Where are you oﬀ to?" asked Yashvin. "Oh, here are your three horses," he
added, seeing the carriage drive up.
"To the stables, and I’ve got to see Bryansky, too, about the horses," said
Vronsky.
Vronsky had as a fact promised to call at Bryansky’s, some eight miles from
Peterhof, and to bring him some money owing for some horses; and he hoped to
have time to get that in too. But his comrades were at once aware that he was not
only going there.
Petritsky, still humming, winked and made a pout with his lips, as though
he would say: "Oh, yes, we know your Bryansky."
"Mind you’re not late!" was Yashvin’s only comment; and to change the
conversation: "How’s my roan? is he doing all right?" he inquired, looking out of
the window at the middle one of the three horses, which he had sold Vronsky.
"Stop!" cried Petritsky to Vronsky as he was just going out. "Your brother
le a leer and a note for you. Wait a bit; where are they?"
Vronsky stopped.
"Well, where are they?"

clxiii
"Where are they? at’s just the question!" said Petritsky solemnly, moving
his foreﬁnger upwards from his nose.
"Come, tell me; this is silly!" said Vronsky smiling.
"I have not lighted the ﬁre. Here somewhere about."
"Come, enough fooling! Where is the leer?"
"No, I’ve forgoen really. Or was it a dream? Wait a bit, wait a bit! But
what’s the use of geing in a rage. If you’d drunk four boles yesterday as I did
you’d forget where you were lying. Wait a bit, I’ll remember!"
Petritsky went behind the partition and lay down on his bed.
"Wait a bit! is was how I was lying, and this was how he was standing.
Yes—yes—yes…. Here it is!"—and Petritsky pulled a leer out from under the
maress, where he had hidden it.
Vronsky took the leer and his brother’s note. It was the leer he was
expecting—from his mother, reproaching him for not having been to see her—and
the note was from his brother to say that he must have a lile talk with him.
Vronsky knew that it was all about the same thing. "What business is it of theirs!"
thought Vronsky, and crumpling up the leers he thrust them between the buons
of his coat so as to read them carefully on the road. In the porch of the hut he was
met by two oﬃcers; one of his regiment and one of another.
Vronsky’s quarters were always a meeting place for all the oﬃcers.
"Where are you oﬀ to?"
"I must go to Peterhof."
"Has the mare come from Tsarskoe?"
"Yes, but I’ve not seen her yet."
"ey say Mahotin’s Gladiator’s lame."
"Nonsense! But however are you going to race in this mud?" said the other.
"Here are my saviors!" cried Petritsky, seeing them come in. Before him
stood the orderly with a tray of brandy and salted cucumbers. "Here’s Yashvin
ordering me to drink a pick-me-up."
"Well, you did give it to us yesterday," said one of those who had come in;
"you didn’t let us get a wink of sleep all night."
"Oh, didn’t we make a prey ﬁnish!" said Petritsky. "Volkov climbed onto
the roof and began telling us how sad he was. I said: ‘Let’s have music, the funeral
march!’ He fairly dropped asleep on the roof over the funeral march."
"Drink it up; you positively must drink the brandy, and then seltzer water
and a lot of lemon," said Yashvin, standing over Petritsky like a mother making a
child take medicine, "and then a lile champagne—just a small bole."
"Come, there’s some sense in that. Stop a bit, Vronsky. We’ll all have a
drink."
"No; good-bye all of you. I’m not going to drink today."

clxiv
"Why, are you gaining weight? All right, then we must have it alone. Give
us the seltzer water and lemon."
"Vronsky!" shouted someone when he was already outside.
"Well?"
"You’d beer get your hair cut, it’ll weigh you down, especially at the top."
Vronsky was in fact beginning, prematurely, to get a lile bald. He laughed
gaily, showing his even teeth, and pulling his cap over the thin place, went out
and got into his carriage.
"To the stables!" he said, and was just pulling out the leers to read them
through, but he thought beer of it, and put oﬀ reading them so as not to distract
his aention before looking at the mare. "Later!"

Chapter 
e temporary stable, a wooden shed, had been put up close to the race course,
and there his mare was to have been taken the previous day. He had not yet seen
her there.
During the last few days he had not ridden her out for exercise himself, but
had put her in the charge of the trainer, and so now he positively did not know in
what condition his mare had arrived yesterday and was today. He had scarcely
got out of his carriage when his groom, the so-called "stable boy," recognizing
the carriage some way oﬀ, called the trainer. A dry-looking Englishman, in high
boots and a short jacket, clean-shaven, except for a tu below his chin, came to
meet him, walking with the uncouth gait of jockey, turning his elbows out and
swaying from side to side.
"Well, how’s Frou-Frou?" Vronsky asked in English.
"All right, sir," the Englishman’s voice responded somewhere in the inside
of his throat. "Beer not go in," he added, touching his hat. "I’ve put a muzzle on
her, and the mare’s ﬁdgety. Beer not go in, it’ll excite the mare."
"No, I’m going in. I want to look at her."
"Come along, then," said the Englishman, frowning, and speaking with his
mouth shut, and, with swinging elbows, he went on in front with his disjointed
gait.
ey went into the lile yard in front of the shed. A stable boy, spruce and
smart in his holiday aire, met them with a broom in his hand, and followed them.
In the shed there were ﬁve horses in their separate stalls, and Vronsky knew that
his chief rival, Gladiator, a very tall chestnut horse, had been brought there, and
must be standing among them. Even more than his mare, Vronsky longed to see
Gladiator, whom he had never seen. But he knew that by the etiquee of the race

clxv
course it was not merely impossible for him to see the horse, but improper even to
ask questions about him. Just as he was passing along the passage, the boy opened
the door into the second horse-box on the le, and Vronsky caught a glimpse of
a big chestnut horse with white legs. He knew that this was Gladiator, but, with
the feeling of a man turning away from the sight of another man’s open leer, he
turned round and went into Frou-Frou’s stall.
"e horse is here belonging to Mak… Mak… I never can say the name," said
the Englishman, over his shoulder, pointing his big ﬁnger and dirty nail towards
Gladiator’s stall.
"Mahotin? Yes, he’s my most serious rival," said Vronsky.
"If you were riding him," said the Englishman, "I’d bet on you."
"Frou-Frou’s more nervous; he’s stronger," said Vronsky, smiling at the compliment to his riding.
"In a steeplechase it all depends on riding and on pluck," said the Englishman.
Of pluck—that is, energy and courage—Vronsky did not merely feel that he
had enough; what was of far more importance, he was ﬁrmly convinced that no
one in the world could have more of this "pluck" than he had.
"Don’t you think I want more thinning down?"
"Oh, no," answered the Englishman. "Please, don’t speak loud. e mare’s
ﬁdgety," he added, nodding towards the horse-box, before which they were standing, and from which came the sound of restless stamping in the straw.
He opened the door, and Vronsky went into the horse-box, dimly lighted
by one lile window. In the horse-box stood a dark bay mare, with a muzzle
on, picking at the fresh straw with her hoofs. Looking round him in the twilight
of the horse-box, Vronsky unconsciously took in once more in a comprehensive
glance all the points of his favorite mare. Frou-Frou was a beast of medium size,
not altogether free from reproach, from a breeder’s point of view. She was smallboned all over; though her chest was extremely prominent in front, it was narrow.
Her hind-quarters were a lile drooping, and in her fore-legs, and still more in
her hind-legs, there was a noticeable curvature. e muscles of both hind- and
fore-legs were not very thick; but across her shoulders the mare was exceptionally
broad, a peculiarity specially striking now that she was lean from training. e
bones of her legs below the knees looked no thicker than a ﬁnger from in front,
but were extraordinarily thick seen from the side. She looked altogether, except
across the shoulders, as it were, pinched in at the sides and pressed out in depth.
But she had in the highest degree the quality that makes all defects forgoen:
that quality was blood, the blood that tells, as the English expression has it. e
muscles stood up sharply under the network of sinews, covered with the delicate,
mobile skin, so as satin, and they were hard as bone. Her clean-cut head, with

clxvi
prominent, bright, spirited eyes, broadened out at the open nostrils, that showed
the red blood in the cartilage within. About all her ﬁgure, and especially her head,
there was a certain expression of energy, and, at the same time, of soness. She
was one of those creatures which seem only not to speak because the mechanism
of their mouth does not allow them to.
To Vronsky, at any rate, it seemed that she understood all he felt at that
moment, looking at her.
Directly Vronsky went towards her, she drew in a deep breath, and, turning back her prominent eye till the white looked bloodshot, she started at the approaching ﬁgures from the opposite side, shaking her muzzle, and shiing lightly
from one leg to the other.
"ere, you see how ﬁdgety she is," said the Englishman.
"ere, darling! ere!" said Vronsky, going up to the mare and speaking
soothingly to her.
But the nearer he came, the more excited she grew. Only when he stood
by her head, she was suddenly quieter, while the muscles quivered under her
so, delicate coat. Vronsky paed her strong neck, straightened over her sharp
withers a stray lock of her mane that had fallen on the other side, and moved his
face near her dilated nostrils, transparent as a bat’s wing. She drew a loud breath
and snorted out through her tense nostrils, started, pricked up her sharp ear, and
put out her strong, black lip towards Vronsky, as though she would nip hold of
his sleeve. But remembering the muzzle, she shook it and again began restlessly
stamping one aer the other her shapely legs.
"iet, darling, quiet!" he said, paing her again over her hind-quarters;
and with a glad sense that his mare was in the best possible condition, he went
out of the horse-box.
e mare’s excitement had infected Vronsky. He felt that his heart was
throbbing, and that he, too, like the mare, longed to move, to bite; it was both
dreadful and delicious.
"Well, I rely on you, then," he said to the Englishman; "half-past six on the
ground."
"All right," said the Englishman. "Oh, where are you going, my lord?" he
asked suddenly, using the title "my lord," which he had scarcely ever used before.
Vronsky in amazement raised his head, and stared, as he knew how to stare,
not into the Englishman’s eyes, but at his forehead, astounded at the impertinence
of his question. But realizing that in asking this the Englishman had been looking
at him not as an employer, but as a jockey, he answered:
"I’ve got to go to Bryansky’s; I shall be home within an hour."
"How oen I’m asked that question today!" he said to himself, and he
blushed, a thing which rarely happened to him. e Englishman looked gravely

clxvii
at him; and, as though he, too, knew where Vronsky was going, he added:
"e great thing’s to keep quiet before a race," said he; "don’t get out of
temper or upset about anything."
"All right," answered Vronsky, smiling; and jumping into his carriage, he
told the man to drive to Peterhof.
Before he had driven many paces away, the dark clouds that had been
threatening rain all day broke, and there was a heavy downpour of rain.
"What a pity!" thought Vronsky, puing up the roof of the carriage. "It was
muddy before, now it will be a perfect swamp." As he sat in solitude in the closed
carriage, he took out his mother’s leer and his brother’s note, and read them
through.
Yes, it was the same thing over and over again. Everyone, his mother, his
brother, everyone thought ﬁt to interfere in the aﬀairs of his heart. is interference aroused in him a feeling of angry hatred—a feeling he had rarely known
before. "What business is it of theirs? Why does everybody feel called upon to
concern himself about me? And why do they worry me so? Just because they see
that this is something they can’t understand. If it were a common, vulgar, worldly
intrigue, they would have le me alone. ey feel that this is something diﬀerent,
that this is not a mere pastime, that this woman is dearer to me than life. And this
is incomprehensible, and that’s why it annoys them. Whatever our destiny is or
may be, we have made it ourselves, and we do not complain of it," he said, in the
word we linking himself with Anna. "No, they must needs teach us how to live.
ey haven’t an idea of what happiness is; they don’t know that without our love,
for us there is neither happiness nor unhappiness—no life at all," he thought.
He was angry with all of them for their interference just because he felt in
his soul that they, all these people, were right. He felt that the love that bound him
to Anna was not a momentary impulse, which would pass, as worldly intrigues
do pass, leaving no other traces in the life of either but pleasant or unpleasant
memories. He felt all the torture of his own and her position, all the diﬃculty
there was for them, conspicuous as they were in the eye of all the world, in concealing their love, in lying and deceiving; and in lying, deceiving, feigning, and
continually thinking of others, when the passion that united them was so intense
that they were both oblivious of everything else but their love.
He vividly recalled all the constantly recurring instances of inevitable necessity for lying and deceit, which were so against his natural bent. He recalled
particularly vividly the shame he had more than once detected in her at this necessity for lying and deceit. And he experienced the strange feeling that had
sometimes come upon him since his secret love for Anna. is was a feeling of
loathing for something—whether for Alexey Alexandrovitch, or for himself, or for
the whole world, he could not have said. But he always drove away this strange

clxviii
feeling. Now, too, he shook it oﬀ and continued the thread of his thoughts.
"Yes, she was unhappy before, but proud and at peace; and now she cannot
be at peace and feel secure in her dignity, though she does not show it. Yes, we
must put an end to it," he decided.
And for the ﬁrst time the idea clearly presented itself that it was essential to
put an end to this false position, and the sooner the beer. "row up everything,
she and I, and hide ourselves somewhere alone with our love," he said to himself.

Chapter 
e rain did not last long, and by the time Vronsky arrived, his sha-horse troing
at full speed and dragging the trace-horses galloping through the mud, with their
reins hanging loose, the sun had peeped out again, the roofs of the summer villas
and the old limetrees in the gardens on both sides of the principal streets sparkled
with wet brilliance, and from the twigs came a pleasant drip and from the roofs
rushing streams of water. He thought no more of the shower spoiling the race
course, but was rejoicing now that—thanks to the rain—he would be sure to ﬁnd
her at home and alone, as he knew that Alexey Alexandrovitch, who had lately
returned from a foreign watering place, had not moved from Petersburg.
Hoping to ﬁnd her alone, Vronsky alighted, as he always did, to avoid attracting aention, before crossing the bridge, and walked to the house. He did
not go up the steps to the street door, but went into the court.
"Has your master come?" he asked a gardener.
"No, sir. e mistress is at home. But will you please go to the front door;
there are servants there," the gardener answered. "ey’ll open the door."
"No, I’ll go in from the garden."
And feeling satisﬁed that she was alone, and wanting to take her by surprise, since he had not promised to be there today, and she would certainly not
expect him to come before the races, he walked, holding his sword and stepping
cautiously over the sandy path, bordered with ﬂowers, to the terrace that looked
out upon the garden. Vronsky forgot now all that he had thought on the way of
the hardships and diﬃculties of their position. He thought of nothing but that
he would see her directly, not in imagination, but living, all of her, as she was in
reality. He was just going in, stepping on his whole foot so as not to creak, up the
worn steps of the terrace, when he suddenly remembered what he always forgot,
and what caused the most torturing side of his relations with her, her son with
his questioning—hostile, as he fancied—eyes.
is boy was more oen than anyone else a check upon their freedom.
When he was present, both Vronsky and Anna did not merely avoid speaking

clxix
of anything that they could not have repeated before everyone; they did not even
allow themselves to refer by hints to anything the boy did not understand. ey
had made no agreement about this, it had seled itself. ey would have felt it
wounding themselves to deceive the child. In his presence they talked like acquaintances. But in spite of this caution, Vronsky oen saw the child’s intent,
bewildered glance ﬁxed upon him, and a strange shyness, uncertainty, at one
time friendliness, at another, coldness and reserve, in the boy’s manner to him;
as though the child felt that between this man and his mother there existed some
important bond, the signiﬁcance of which he could not understand.
As a fact, the boy did feel that he could not understand this relation, and he
tried painfully, and was not able to make clear to himself what feeling he ought
to have for this man. With a child’s keen instinct for every manifestation of feeling, he saw distinctly that his father, his governess, his nurse,—all did not merely
dislike Vronsky, but looked on him with horror and aversion, though they never
said anything about him, while his mother looked on him as her greatest friend.
"What does it mean? Who is he? How ought I to love him? If I don’t know,
it’s my fault; either I’m stupid or a naughty boy," thought the child. And this
was what caused his dubious, inquiring, sometimes hostile, expression, and the
shyness and uncertainty which Vronsky found so irksome. is child’s presence
always and infallibly called up in Vronsky that strange feeling of inexplicable
loathing which he had experienced of late. is child’s presence called up both
in Vronsky and in Anna a feeling akin to the feeling of a sailor who sees by the
compass that the direction in which he is swily moving is far from the right one,
but that to arrest his motion is not in his power, that every instant is carrying him
further and further away, and that to admit to himself his deviation from the right
direction is the same as admiing his certain ruin.
is child, with his innocent outlook upon life, was the compass that showed
them the point to which they had departed from what they knew, but did not want
to know.
is time Seryozha was not at home, and she was completely alone. She
was siing on the terrace waiting for the return of her son, who had gone out for
his walk and been caught in the rain. She had sent a manservant and a maid out
to look for him. Dressed in a white gown, deeply embroidered, she was siing
in a corner of the terrace behind some ﬂowers, and did not hear him. Bending
her curly black head, she pressed her forehead against a cool watering pot that
stood on the parapet, and both her lovely hands, with the rings he knew so well,
clasped the pot. e beauty of her whole ﬁgure, her head, her neck, her hands,
struck Vronsky every time as something new and unexpected. He stood still,
gazing at her in ecstasy. But, directly he would have made a step to come nearer
to her, she was aware of his presence, pushed away the watering pot, and turned

clxx
her ﬂushed face towards him.
"What’s the maer? You are ill?" he said to her in French, going up to
her. He would have run to her, but remembering that there might be spectators,
he looked round towards the balcony door, and reddened a lile, as he always
reddened, feeling that he had to be afraid and be on his guard.
"No, I’m quite well," she said, geing up and pressing his outstretched hand
tightly. "I did not expect … thee."
"Mercy! what cold hands!" he said.
"You startled me," she said. "I’m alone, and expecting Seryozha; he’s out for
a walk; they’ll come in from this side."
But, in spite of her eﬀorts to be calm, her lips were quivering.
"Forgive me for coming, but I couldn’t pass the day without seeing you," he
went on, speaking French, as he always did to avoid using the stiﬀ Russian plural
form, so impossibly frigid between them, and the dangerously intimate singular.
"Forgive you? I’m so glad!"
"But you’re ill or worried," he went on, not leing go her hands and bending
over her. "What were you thinking o?"
"Always the same thing," she said, with a smile.
She spoke the truth. If ever at any moment she had been asked what she was
thinking of, she could have answered truly: of the same thing, of her happiness
and her unhappiness. She was thinking, just when he came upon her, of this: why
was it, she wondered, that to others, to Betsy (she knew of her secret connection
with Tushkevitch) it was all easy, while to her it was such torture? Today this
thought gained special poignancy from certain other considerations. She asked
him about the races. He answered her questions, and, seeing that she was agitated,
trying to calm her, he began telling her in the simplest tone the details of his
preparations for the races.
"Tell him or not tell him?" she thought, looking into his quiet, aﬀectionate
eyes. "He is so happy, so absorbed in his races that he won’t understand as he
ought, he won’t understand all the gravity of this fact to us."
"But you haven’t told me what you were thinking of when I came in," he
said, interrupting his narrative; "please tell me!"
She did not answer, and, bending her head a lile, she looked inquiringly
at him from under her brows, her eyes shining under their long lashes. Her hand
shook as it played with a leaf she had picked. He saw it, and his face expressed
that uer subjection, that slavish devotion, which had done so much to win her.
"I see something has happened. Do you suppose I can be at peace, knowing you have a trouble I am not sharing? Tell me, for God’s sake," he repeated
imploringly.
"Yes, I shan’t be able to forgive him if he does not realize all the gravity of it.

clxxi
Beer not tell; why put him to the proo?" she thought, still staring at him in the
same way, and feeling the hand that held the leaf was trembling more and more.
"For God’s sake!" he repeated, taking her hand.
"Shall I tell you?"
"Yes, yes, yes . . ."
"I’m with child," she said, soly and deliberately. e leaf in her hand shook
more violently, but she did not take her eyes oﬀ him, watching how he would
take it. He turned white, would have said something, but stopped; he dropped
her hand, and his head sank on his breast. "Yes, he realizes all the gravity of it,"
she thought, and gratefully she pressed his hand.
But she was mistaken in thinking he realized the gravity of the fact as she,
a woman, realized it. On hearing it, he felt come upon him with tenfold intensity
that strange feeling of loathing of someone. But at the same time, he felt that the
turning-point he had been longing for had come now; that it was impossible to
go on concealing things from her husband, and it was inevitable in one way or
another that they should soon put an end to their unnatural position. But, besides
that, her emotion physically aﬀected him in the same way. He looked at her with
a look of submissive tenderness, kissed her hand, got up, and, in silence, paced up
and down the terrace.
"Yes," he said, going up to her resolutely. "Neither you nor I have looked on
our relations as a passing amusement, and now our fate is sealed. It is absolutely
necessary to put an end"—he looked round as he spoke—"to the deception in which
we are living."
"Put an end? How put an end, Alexey?" she said soly.
She was calmer now, and her face lighted up with a tender smile.
"Leave your husband and make our life one."
"It is one as it is," she answered, scarcely audibly.
"Yes, but altogether; altogether."
"But how, Alexey, tell me how?" she said in melancholy mockery at the
hopelessness of her own position. "Is there any way out of such a position? Am
I not the wife of my husband?"
"ere is a way out of every position. We must take our line," he said. "Anything’s beer than the position in which you’re living. Of course, I see how you
torture yourself over everything—the world and your son and your husband."
"Oh, not over my husband," she said, with a quiet smile. "I don’t know him,
I don’t think of him. He doesn’t exist."
"You’re not speaking sincerely. I know you. You worry about him too."
"Oh, he doesn’t even know," she said, and suddenly a hot ﬂush came over
her face; her cheeks, her brow, her neck crimsoned, and tears of shame came into
her eyes. "But we won’t talk of him."

clxxii

Chapter 
Vronsky had several times already, though not so resolutely as now, tried to bring
her to consider their position, and every time he had been confronted by the same
superﬁciality and triviality with which she met his appeal now. It was as though
there were something in this which she could not or would not face, as though
directly she began to speak of this, she, the real Anna, retreated somehow into
herself, and another strange and unaccountable woman came out, whom he did
not love, and whom he feared, and who was in opposition to him. But today he
was resolved to have it out.
"Whether he knows or not," said Vronsky, in his usual quiet and resolute
tone, "that’s nothing to do with us. We cannot … you cannot stay like this, especially now."
"What’s to be done, according to you?" she asked with the same frivolous
irony. She who had so feared he would take her condition too lightly was now
vexed with him for deducing from it the necessity of taking some step.
"Tell him everything, and leave him."
"Very well, let us suppose I do that," she said. "Do you know what the result
of that would be? I can tell you it all beforehand," and a wicked light gleamed
in her eyes, that had been so so a minute before. "‘Eh, you love another man,
and have entered into criminal intrigues with him?’" (Mimicking her husband,
she threw an emphasis on the word "criminal," as Alexey Alexandrovitch did.) "‘I
warned you of the results in the religious, the civil, and the domestic relation.
You have not listened to me. Now I cannot let you disgrace my name,—’" "and
my son," she had meant to say, but about her son she could not jest,—"‘disgrace
my name, and’—and more in the same style," she added. "In general terms, he’ll
say in his oﬃcial manner, and with all distinctness and precision, that he cannot
let me go, but will take all measures in his power to prevent scandal. And he
will calmly and punctually act in accordance with his words. at’s what will
happen. He’s not a man, but a machine, and a spiteful machine when he’s angry,"
she added, recalling Alexey Alexandrovitch as she spoke, with all the peculiarities
of his ﬁgure and manner of speaking, and reckoning against him every defect she
could ﬁnd in him, soening nothing for the great wrong she herself was doing
him.
"But, Anna," said Vronsky, in a so and persuasive voice, trying to soothe
her, "we absolutely must, anyway, tell him, and then be guided by the line he
takes."
"What, run away?"
"And why not run away? I don’t see how we can keep on like this. And not
for my sake—I see that you suﬀer."

clxxiii
"Yes, run away, and become your mistress," she said angrily.
"Anna," he said, with reproachful tenderness.
"Yes," she went on, "become your mistress, and complete the ruin of…"
Again she would have said "my son," but she could not uer that word.
Vronsky could not understand how she, with her strong and truthful nature,
could endure this state of deceit, and not long to get out of it. But he did not
suspect that the chief cause of it was the word—son, which she could not bring
herself to pronounce. When she thought of her son, and his future aitude to his
mother, who had abandoned his father, she felt such terror at what she had done,
that she could not face it; but, like a woman, could only try to comfort herself
with lying assurances that everything would remain as it always had been, and
that it was possible to forget the fearful question of how it would be with her son.
"I beg you, I entreat you," she said suddenly, taking his hand, and speaking
in quite a diﬀerent tone, sincere and tender, "never speak to me of that!"
"But, Anna…"
"Never. Leave it to me. I know all the baseness, all the horror of my position;
but it’s not so easy to arrange as you think. And leave it to me, and do what I say.
Never speak to me of it. Do you promise me?… No, no, promise!…"
"I promise everything, but I can’t be at peace, especially aer what you have
told me. I can’t be at peace, when you can’t be at peace…."
"I?" she repeated. "Yes, I am worried sometimes; but that will pass, if you
will never talk about this. When you talk about it—it’s only then it worries me."
"I don’t understand," he said.
"I know," she interrupted him, "how hard it is for your truthful nature to lie,
and I grieve for you. I oen think that you have ruined your whole life for me."
"I was just thinking the very same thing," he said; "how could you sacriﬁce
everything for my sake? I can’t forgive myself that you’re unhappy!"
"I unhappy?" she said, coming closer to him, and looking at him with an
ecstatic smile of love. "I am like a hungry man who has been given food. He may
be cold, and dressed in rags, and ashamed, but he is not unhappy. I unhappy? No,
this is my unhappiness…."
She could hear the sound of her son’s voice coming towards them, and
glancing swily round the terrace, she got up impulsively. Her eyes glowed with
the ﬁre he knew so well; with a rapid movement she raised her lovely hands, covered with rings, took his head, looked a long look into his face, and, puing up her
face with smiling, parted lips, swily kissed his mouth and both eyes, and pushed
him away. She would have gone, but he held her back.
"When?" he murmured in a whisper, gazing in ecstasy at her.
"Tonight, at one o’clock," she whispered, and, with a heavy sigh, she walked
with her light, swi step to meet her son.

clxxiv
Seryozha had been caught by the rain in the big garden, and he and his
nurse had taken shelter in an arbor.
"Well, au revoir," she said to Vronsky. "I must soon be geing ready for the
races. Betsy promised to fetch me."
Vronsky, looking at his watch, went away hurriedly.

Chapter 
When Vronsky looked at his watch on the Karenins’ balcony, he was so greatly
agitated and lost in his thoughts that he saw the ﬁgures on the watch’s face, but
could not take in what time it was. He came out on to the high road and walked,
picking his way carefully through the mud, to his carriage. He was so completely
absorbed in his feeling for Anna, that he did not even think what o’clock it was,
and whether he had time to go to Bryansky’s. He had le him, as oen happens,
only the external faculty of memory, that points out each step one has to take, one
aer the other. He went up to his coachman, who was dozing on the box in the
shadow, already lengthening, of a thick limetree; he admired the shiing clouds
of midges circling over the hot horses, and, waking the coachman, he jumped
into the carriage, and told him to drive to Bryansky’s. It was only aer driving
nearly ﬁve miles that he had suﬃciently recovered himself to look at his watch,
and realize that it was half-past ﬁve, and he was late.
ere were several races ﬁxed for that day: the Mounted Guards’ race, then
the oﬃcers’ mile-and-a-half race, then the three-mile race, and then the race for
which he was entered. He could still be in time for his race, but if he went to
Bryansky’s he could only just be in time, and he would arrive when the whole
of the court would be in their places. at would be a pity. But he had promised
Bryansky to come, and so he decided to drive on, telling the coachman not to
spare the horses.
He reached Bryansky’s, spent ﬁve minutes there, and galloped back. is
rapid drive calmed him. All that was painful in his relations with Anna, all the
feeling of indeﬁniteness le by their conversation, had slipped out of his mind. He
was thinking now with pleasure and excitement of the race, of his being anyhow,
in time, and now and then the thought of the blissful interview awaiting him that
night ﬂashed across his imagination like a ﬂaming light.
e excitement of the approaching race gained upon him as he drove further
and further into the atmosphere of the races, overtaking carriages driving up from
the summer villas or out of Petersburg.
At his quarters no one was le at home; all were at the races, and his valet
was looking out for him at the gate. While he was changing his clothes, his valet

clxxv
told him that the second race had begun already, that a lot of gentlemen had been
to ask for him, and a boy had twice run up from the stables. Dressing without
hurry (he never hurried himself, and never lost his self-possession), Vronsky drove
to the sheds. From the sheds he could see a perfect sea of carriages, and people on
foot, soldiers surrounding the race course, and pavilions swarming with people.
e second race was apparently going on, for just as he went into the sheds he
heard a bell ringing. Going towards the stable, he met the white-legged chestnut,
Mahotin’s Gladiator, being led to the race-course in a blue forage horsecloth, with
what looked like huge ears edged with blue.
"Where’s Cord?" he asked the stable-boy.
"In the stable, puing on the saddle."
In the open horse-box stood Frou-Frou, saddled ready. ey were just going
to lead her out.
"I’m not too late?"
"All right! All right!" said the Englishman; "don’t upset yourself!"
Vronsky once more took in in one glance the exquisite lines of his favorite
mare; who was quivering all over, and with an eﬀort he tore himself from the
sight of her, and went out of the stable. He went towards the pavilions at the
most favorable moment for escaping aention. e mile-and-a-half race was just
ﬁnishing, and all eyes were ﬁxed on the horse-guard in front and the light hussar
behind, urging their horses on with a last eﬀort close to the winning post. From
the center and outside of the ring all were crowding to the winning post, and
a group of soldiers and oﬃcers of the horse-guards were shouting loudly their
delight at the expected triumph of their oﬃcer and comrade. Vronsky moved into
the middle of the crowd unnoticed, almost at the very moment when the bell rang
at the ﬁnish of the race, and the tall, mudspaered horse-guard who came in ﬁrst,
bending over the saddle, let go the reins of his panting gray horse that looked dark
with sweat.
e horse, stiﬀening out its legs, with an eﬀort stopped its rapid course,
and the oﬃcer of the horse-guards looked round him like a man waking up from
a heavy sleep, and just managed to smile. A crowd of friends and outsiders pressed
round him.
Vronsky intentionally avoided that select crowd of the upper world, which
was moving and talking with discreet freedom before the pavilions. He knew that
Madame Karenina was there, and Betsy, and his brother’s wife, and he purposely
did not go near them for fear of something distracting his aention. But he was
continually met and stopped by acquaintances, who told him about the previous
races, and kept asking him why he was so late.
At the time when the racers had to go to the pavilion to receive the prizes,
and all aention was directed to that point, Vronsky’s elder brother, Alexander,

clxxvi
a colonel with heavy fringed epaulets, came up to him. He was not tall, though
as broadly built as Alexey, and handsomer and rosier than he; he had a red nose,
and an open, drunken-looking face.
"Did you get my note?" he said. "ere’s never any ﬁnding you."
Alexander Vronsky, in spite of the dissolute life, and in especial the drunken
habits, for which he was notorious, was quite one of the court circle.
Now, as he talked to his brother of a maer bound to be exceedingly disagreeable to him, knowing that the eyes of many people might be ﬁxed upon him,
he kept a smiling countenance, as though he were jesting with his brother about
something of lile moment.
"I got it, and I really can’t make out what you are worrying yourself about,"
said Alexey.
"I’m worrying myself because the remark has just been made to me that you
weren’t here, and that you were seen in Peterhof on Monday."
"ere are maers which only concern those directly interested in them,
and the maer you are so worried about is…"
"Yes, but if so, you may as well cut the service…."
"I beg you not to meddle, and that’s all I have to say."
Alexey Vronsky’s frowning face turned white, and his prominent lower jaw
quivered, which happened rarely with him. Being a man of very warm heart, he
was seldom angry; but when he was angry, and when his chin quivered, then, as
Alexander Vronsky knew, he was dangerous. Alexander Vronsky smiled gaily.
"I only wanted to give you Mother’s leer. Answer it, and don’t worry
about anything just before the race. Bonne ance," he added, smiling and he
moved away from him. But aer him another friendly greeting brought Vronsky
to a standstill.
"So you won’t recognize your friends! How are you, mon er?" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, as conspicuously brilliant in the midst of all the Petersburg brilliance as he was in Moscow, his face rosy, and his whiskers sleek and glossy. "I
came up yesterday, and I’m delighted that I shall see your triumph. When shall
we meet?"
"Come tomorrow to the messroom," said Vronsky, and squeezing him by the
sleeve of his coat, with apologies, he moved away to the center of the race course,
where the horses were being led for the great steeplechase.
e horses who had run in the last race were being led home, steaming
and exhausted, by the stable-boys, and one aer another the fresh horses for the
coming race made their appearance, for the most part English racers, wearing
horsecloths, and looking with their drawn-up bellies like strange, huge birds. On
the right was led in Frou-Frou, lean and beautiful, liing up her elastic, rather long
pasterns, as though moved by springs. Not far from her they were taking the rug

clxxvii
oﬀ the lop-eared Gladiator. e strong, exquisite, perfectly correct lines of the
stallion, with his superb hind-quarters and excessively short pasterns almost over
his hoofs, aracted Vronsky’s aention in spite of himself. He would have gone
up to his mare, but he was again detained by an acquaintance.
"Oh, there’s Karenin!" said the acquaintance with whom he was chaing.
"He’s looking for his wife, and she’s in the middle of the pavilion. Didn’t you see
her?"
"No," answered Vronsky, and without even glancing round towards the
pavilion where his friend was pointing out Madame Karenina, he went up to his
mare.
Vronsky had not had time to look at the saddle, about which he had to give
some direction, when the competitors were summoned to the pavilion to receive
their numbers and places in the row at starting. Seventeen oﬃcers, looking serious and severe, many with pale faces, met together in the pavilion and drew the
numbers. Vronsky drew the number seven. e cry was heard: "Mount!"
Feeling that with the others riding in the race, he was the center upon which
all eyes were fastened, Vronsky walked up to his mare in that state of nervous
tension in which he usually became deliberate and composed in his movements.
Cord, in honor of the races, had put on his best clothes, a black coat buoned up,
a stiﬄy starched collar, which propped up his cheeks, a round black hat, and top
boots. He was calm and digniﬁed as ever, and was with his own hands holding
Frou-Frou by both reins, standing straight in front of her. Frou-Frou was still
trembling as though in a fever. Her eye, full of ﬁre, glanced sideways at Vronsky.
Vronsky slipped his ﬁnger under the saddle-girth. e mare glanced aslant at
him, drew up her lip, and twitched her ear. e Englishman puckered up his lips,
intending to indicate a smile that anyone should verify his saddling.
"Get up; you won’t feel so excited."
Vronsky looked round for the last time at his rivals. He knew that he would
not see them during the race. Two were already riding forward to the point from
which they were to start. Galtsin, a friend of Vronsky’s and one of his more
formidable rivals, was moving round a bay horse that would not let him mount.
A lile light hussar in tight riding breeches rode oﬀ at a gallop, crouched up like
a cat on the saddle, in imitation of English jockeys. Prince Kuzovlev sat with a
white face on his thoroughbred mare from the Grabovsky stud, while an English
groom led her by the bridle. Vronsky and all his comrades knew Kuzovlev and his
peculiarity of "weak nerves" and terrible vanity. ey knew that he was afraid of
everything, afraid of riding a spirited horse. But now, just because it was terrible,
because people broke their necks, and there was a doctor standing at each obstacle,
and an ambulance with a cross on it, and a sister of mercy, he had made up his
mind to take part in the race. eir eyes met, and Vronsky gave him a friendly and

clxxviii
encouraging nod. Only one he did not see, his chief rival, Mahotin on Gladiator.
"Don’t be in a hurry," said Cord to Vronsky, "and remember one thing: don’t
hold her in at the fences, and don’t urge her on; let her go as she likes."
"All right, all right," said Vronsky, taking the reins.
"If you can, lead the race; but don’t lose heart till the last minute, even if
you’re behind."
Before the mare had time to move, Vronsky stepped with an agile, vigorous
movement into the steel-toothed stirrup, and lightly and ﬁrmly seated himself
on the creaking leather of the saddle. Geing his right foot in the stirrup, he
smoothed the double reins, as he always did, between his ﬁngers, and Cord let go.
As though she did not know which foot to put ﬁrst, Frou-Frou started, dragging at the reins with her long neck, and as though she were on springs, shaking
her rider from side to side. Cord quickened his step, following him. e excited
mare, trying to shake oﬀ her rider ﬁrst on one side and then the other, pulled at
the reins, and Vronsky tried in vain with voice and hand to soothe her.
ey were just reaching the dammed-up stream on their way to the starting
point. Several of the riders were in front and several behind, when suddenly
Vronsky heard the sound of a horse galloping in the mud behind him, and he was
overtaken by Mahotin on his white-legged, lop-eared Gladiator. Mahotin smiled,
showing his long teeth, but Vronsky looked angrily at him. He did not like him,
and regarded him now as his most formidable rival. He was angry with him for
galloping past and exciting his mare. Frou-Frou started into a gallop, her le
foot forward, made two bounds, and freing at the tightened reins, passed into
a jolting trot, bumping her rider up and down. Cord, too, scowled, and followed
Vronsky almost at a trot.

Chapter 
ere were seventeen oﬃcers in all riding in this race. e race course was a large
three-mile ring of the form of an ellipse in front of the pavilion. On this course
nine obstacles had been arranged: the stream, a big and solid barrier ﬁve feet high,
just before the pavilion, a dry ditch, a ditch full of water, a precipitous slope, an
Irish barricade (one of the most diﬃcult obstacles, consisting of a mound fenced
with brushwood, beyond which was a ditch out of sight for the horses, so that the
horse had to clear both obstacles or might be killed); then two more ditches ﬁlled
with water, and one dry one; and the end of the race was just facing the pavilion.
But the race began not in the ring, but two hundred yards away from it, and in
that part of the course was the ﬁrst obstacle, a dammed-up stream, seven feet in
breadth, which the racers could leap or wade through as they preferred.

clxxix
ree times they were ranged ready to start, but each time some horse thrust
itself out of line, and they had to begin again. e umpire who was starting them,
Colonel Sestrin, was beginning to lose his temper, when at last for the fourth time
he shouted "Away!" and the racers started.
Every eye, every opera glass, was turned on the brightly colored group of
riders at the moment they were in line to start.
"ey’re oﬀ! ey’re starting!" was heard on all sides aer the hush of
expectation.
And lile groups and solitary ﬁgures among the public began running from
place to place to get a beer view. In the very ﬁrst minute the close group of
horsemen drew out, and it could be seen that they were approaching the stream
in twos and threes and one behind another. To the spectators it seemed as though
they had all started simultaneously, but to the racers there were seconds of difference that had great value to them.
Frou-Frou, excited and over-nervous, had lost the ﬁrst moment, and several
horses had started before her, but before reaching the stream, Vronsky, who was
holding in the mare with all his force as she tugged at the bridle, easily overtook
three, and there were le in front of him Mahotin’s chestnut Gladiator, whose
hind-quarters were moving lightly and rhythmically up and down exactly in front
of Vronsky, and in front of all, the dainty mare Diana bearing Kuzovlev more dead
than alive.
For the ﬁrst instant Vronsky was not master either of himself or his mare.
Up to the ﬁrst obstacle, the stream, he could not guide the motions of his mare.
Gladiator and Diana came up to it together and almost at the same instant;
simultaneously they rose above the stream and ﬂew across to the other side; FrouFrou darted aer them, as if ﬂying; but at the very moment when Vronsky felt
himself in the air, he suddenly saw almost under his mare’s hoofs Kuzovlev, who
was ﬂoundering with Diana on the further side of the stream. (Kuzovlev had let
go the reins as he took the leap, and the mare had sent him ﬂying over her head.)
ose details Vronsky learned later; at the moment all he saw was that just under
him, where Frou-Frou must alight, Diana’s legs or head might be in the way. But
Frou-Frou drew up her legs and back in the very act of leaping, like a falling cat,
and, clearing the other mare, alighted beyond her.
"O the darling!" thought Vronsky.
Aer crossing the stream Vronsky had complete control of his mare, and
began holding her in, intending to cross the great barrier behind Mahotin, and to
try to overtake him in the clear ground of about ﬁve hundred yards that followed
it.
e great barrier stood just in front of the imperial pavilion. e Tsar and
the whole court and crowds of people were all gazing at them—at him, and Ma-

clxxx
hotin a length ahead of him, as they drew near the "devil," as the solid barrier was
called. Vronsky was aware of those eyes fastened upon him from all sides, but
he saw nothing except the ears and neck of his own mare, the ground racing to
meet him, and the back and white legs of Gladiator beating time swily before
him, and keeping always the same distance ahead. Gladiator rose, with no sound
of knocking against anything. With a wave of his short tail he disappeared from
Vronsky’s sight.
"Bravo!" cried a voice.
At the same instant, under Vronsky’s eyes, right before him ﬂashed the
palings of the barrier. Without the slightest change in her action his mare ﬂew
over it; the palings vanished, and he heard only a crash behind him. e mare,
excited by Gladiator’s keeping ahead, had risen too soon before the barrier, and
grazed it with her hind hoofs. But her pace never changed, and Vronsky, feeling a
spaer of mud in his face, realized that he was once more the same distance from
Gladiator. Once more he perceived in front of him the same back and short tail,
and again the same swily moving white legs that got no further away.
At the very moment when Vronsky thought that now was the time to overtake Mahotin, Frou-Frou herself, understanding his thoughts, without any incitement on his part, gained ground considerably, and began geing alongside of Mahotin on the most favorable side, close to the inner cord. Mahotin would not let
her pass that side. Vronsky had hardly formed the thought that he could perhaps
pass on the outer side, when Frou-Frou shied her pace and began overtaking him
on the other side. Frou-Frou’s shoulder, beginning by now to be dark with sweat,
was even with Gladiator’s back. For a few lengths they moved evenly. But before
the obstacle they were approaching, Vronsky began working at the reins, anxious
to avoid having to take the outer circle, and swily passed Mahotin just upon the
declivity. He caught a glimpse of his mud-stained face as he ﬂashed by. He even
fancied that he smiled. Vronsky passed Mahotin, but he was immediately aware
of him close upon him, and he never ceased hearing the even-thudding hoofs and
the rapid and still quite fresh breathing of Gladiator.
e next two obstacles, the water course and the barrier, were easily crossed,
but Vronsky began to hear the snorting and thud of Gladiator closer upon him.
He urged on his mare, and to his delight felt that she easily quickened her pace,
and the thud of Gladiator’s hoofs was again heard at the same distance away.
Vronsky was at the head of the race, just as he wanted to be and as Cord had
advised, and now he felt sure of being the winner. His excitement, his delight, and
his tenderness for Frou-Frou grew keener and keener. He longed to look round
again, but he did not dare do this, and tried to be cool and not to urge on his
mare so to keep the same reserve of force in her as he felt that Gladiator still kept.
ere remained only one obstacle, the most diﬃcult; if he could cross it ahead of

clxxxi
the others he would come in ﬁrst. He was ﬂying towards the Irish barricade, FrouFrou and he both together saw the barricade in the distance, and both the man and
the mare had a moment’s hesitation. He saw the uncertainty in the mare’s ears
and lied the whip, but at the same time felt that his fears were groundless; the
mare knew what was wanted. She quickened her pace and rose smoothly, just as
he had fancied she would, and as she le the ground gave herself up to the force
of her rush, which carried her far beyond the ditch; and with the same rhythm,
without eﬀort, with the same leg forward, Frou-Frou fell back into her pace again.
"Bravo, Vronsky!" he heard shouts from a knot of men—he knew they were
his friends in the regiment—who were standing at the obstacle. He could not fail
to recognize Yashvin’s voice though he did not see him.
"O my sweet!" he said inwardly to Frou-Frou, as he listened for what was
happening behind. "He’s cleared it!" he thought, catching the thud of Gladiator’s
hoofs behind him. ere remained only the last ditch, ﬁlled with water and ﬁve
feet wide. Vronsky did not even look at it, but anxious to get in a long way ﬁrst
began sawing away at the reins, liing the mare’s head and leing it go in time
with her paces. He felt that the mare was at her very last reserve of strength; not
her neck and shoulders merely were wet, but the sweat was standing in drops on
her mane, her head, her sharp ears, and her breath came in short, sharp gasps.
But he knew that she had strength le more than enough for the remaining ﬁve
hundred yards. It was only from feeling himself nearer the ground and from the
peculiar smoothness of his motion that Vronsky knew how greatly the mare had
quickened her pace. She ﬂew over the ditch as though not noticing it. She ﬂew
over it like a bird; but at the same instant Vronsky, to his horror, felt that he had
failed to keep up with the mare’s pace, that he had, he did not know how, made
a fearful, unpardonable mistake, in recovering his seat in the saddle. All at once
his position had shied and he knew that something awful had happened. He
could not yet make out what had happened, when the white legs of a chestnut
horse ﬂashed by close to him, and Mahotin passed at a swi gallop. Vronsky was
touching the ground with one foot, and his mare was sinking on that foot. He
just had time to free his leg when she fell on one side, gasping painfully, and,
making vain eﬀorts to rise with her delicate, soaking neck, she ﬂuered on the
ground at his feet like a shot bird. e clumsy movement made by Vronsky had
broken her back. But that he only knew much later. At that moment he knew
only that Mahotin had ﬂown swily by, while he stood staggering alone on the
muddy, motionless ground, and Frou-Frou lay gasping before him, bending her
head back and gazing at him with her exquisite eyes. Still unable to realize what
had happened, Vronsky tugged at his mare’s reins. Again she struggled all over
like a ﬁsh, and her shoulders seing the saddle heaving, she rose on her front
legs but unable to li her back, she quivered all over and again fell on her side.

clxxxii
With a face hideous with passion, his lower jaw trembling, and his cheeks white,
Vronsky kicked her with his heel in the stomach and again fell to tugging at the
rein. She did not stir, but thrusting her nose into the ground, she simply gazed at
her master with her speaking eyes.
"A—a—a!" groaned Vronsky, clutching at his head. "Ah! what have I done!"
he cried. "e race lost! And my fault! shameful, unpardonable! And the poor
darling, ruined mare! Ah! what have I done!"
A crowd of men, a doctor and his assistant, the oﬃcers of his regiment,
ran up to him. To his misery he felt that he was whole and unhurt. e mare
had broken her back, and it was decided to shoot her. Vronsky could not answer
questions, could not speak to anyone. He turned, and without picking up his cap
that had fallen oﬀ, walked away from the race course, not knowing where he was
going. He felt uerly wretched. For the ﬁrst time in his life he knew the bierest
sort of misfortune, misfortune beyond remedy, and caused by his own fault.
Yashvin overtook him with his cap, and led him home, and half an hour later
Vronsky had regained his self-possession. But the memory of that race remained
for long in his heart, the cruelest and bierest memory of his life.

Chapter 
e external relations of Alexey Alexandrovitch and his wife had remained unchanged. e sole diﬀerence lay in the fact that he was more busily occupied
than ever. As in former years, at the beginning of the spring he had gone to a
foreign watering-place for the sake of his health, deranged by the winter’s work
that every year grew heavier. And just as always he returned in July and at once
fell to work as usual with increased energy. As usual, too, his wife had moved
for the summer to a villa out of town, while he remained in Petersburg. From the
date of their conversation aer the party at Princess Tverskaya’s he had never
spoken again to Anna of his suspicions and his jealousies, and that habitual tone
of his bantering mimicry was the most convenient tone possible for his present
aitude to his wife. He was a lile colder to his wife. He simply seemed to be
slightly displeased with her for that ﬁrst midnight conversation, which she had
repelled. In his aitude to her there was a shade of vexation, but nothing more.
"You would not be open with me," he seemed to say, mentally addressing her; "so
much the worse for you. Now you may beg as you please, but I won’t be open
with you. So much the worse for you!" he said mentally, like a man who, aer
vainly aempting to extinguish a ﬁre, should ﬂy in a rage with his vain eﬀorts
and say, "Oh, very well then! you shall burn for this!" is man, so subtle and
astute in oﬃcial life, did not realize all the senselessness of such an aitude to his

clxxxiii
wife. He did not realize it, because it was too terrible to him to realize his actual
position, and he shut down and locked and sealed up in his heart that secret place
where lay hid his feelings towards his family, that is, his wife and son. He who
had been such a careful father, had from the end of that winter become peculiarly
frigid to his son, and adopted to him just the same bantering tone he used with
his wife. "Aha, young man!" was the greeting with which he met him.
Alexey Alexandrovitch asserted and believed that he had never in any previous year had so much oﬃcial business as that year. But he was not aware that
he sought work for himself that year, that this was one of the means for keeping
shut that secret place where lay hid his feelings towards his wife and son and his
thoughts about them, which became more terrible the longer they lay there. If
anyone had had the right to ask Alexey Alexandrovitch what he thought of his
wife’s behavior, the mild and peaceable Alexey Alexandrovitch would have made
no answer, but he would have been greatly angered with any man who should
question him on that subject. For this reason there positively came into Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s face a look of haughtiness and severity whenever anyone inquired aer his wife’s health. Alexey Alexandrovitch did not want to think at all
about his wife’s behavior, and he actually succeeded in not thinking about it at
all.
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s permanent summer villa was in Peterhof, and the
Countess Lidia Ivanovna used as a rule to spend the summer there, close to Anna,
and constantly seeing her. at year Countess Lidia Ivanovna declined to settle in Peterhof, was not once at Anna Arkadyevna’s, and in conversation with
Alexey Alexandrovitch hinted at the unsuitability of Anna’s close intimacy with
Betsy and Vronsky. Alexey Alexandrovitch sternly cut her short, roundly declaring his wife to be above suspicion, and from that time began to avoid Countess
Lidia Ivanovna. He did not want to see, and did not see, that many people in
society cast dubious glances on his wife; he did not want to understand, and did
not understand, why his wife had so particularly insisted on staying at Tsarskoe,
where Betsy was staying, and not far from the camp of Vronsky’s regiment. He
did not allow himself to think about it, and he did not think about it; but all the
same though he never admied it to himself, and had no proofs, not even suspicious evidence, in the boom of his heart he knew beyond all doubt that he was
a deceived husband, and he was profoundly miserable about it.
How oen during those eight years of happy life with his wife Alexey
Alexandrovitch had looked at other men’s faithless wives and other deceived husbands and asked himself: "How can people descend to that? how is it they don’t
put an end to such a hideous position?" But now, when the misfortune had come
upon himself, he was so far from thinking of puing an end to the position that
he would not recognize it at all, would not recognize it just because it was too

clxxxiv
awful, too unnatural.
Since his return from abroad Alexey Alexandrovitch had twice been at their
country villa. Once he dined there, another time he spent the evening there with
a party of friends, but he had not once stayed the night there, as it had been his
habit to do in previous years.
e day of the races had been a very busy day for Alexey Alexandrovitch;
but when mentally sketching out the day in the morning, he made up his mind to
go to their country house to see his wife immediately aer dinner, and from there
to the races, which all the Court were to witness, and at which he was bound to be
present. He was going to see his wife, because he had determined to see her once
a week to keep up appearances. And besides, on that day, as it was the ﬁeenth,
he had to give his wife some money for her expenses, according to their usual
arrangement.
With his habitual control over his thoughts, though he thought all this about
his wife, he did not let his thoughts stray further in regard to her.
at morning was a very full one for Alexey Alexandrovitch. e evening
before, Countess Lidia Ivanovna had sent him a pamphlet by a celebrated traveler
in China, who was staying in Petersburg, and with it she enclosed a note begging
him to see the traveler himself, as he was an extremely interesting person from
various points of view, and likely to be useful. Alexey Alexandrovitch had not had
time to read the pamphlet through in the evening, and ﬁnished it in the morning.
en people began arriving with petitions, and there came the reports, interviews,
appointments, dismissals, apportionment of rewards, pensions, grants, notes, the
workaday round, as Alexey Alexandrovitch called it, that always took up so much
time. en there was private business of his own, a visit from the doctor and the
steward who managed his property. e steward did not take up much time. He
simply gave Alexey Alexandrovitch the money he needed together with a brief
statement of the position of his aﬀairs, which was not altogether satisfactory, as
it had happened that during that year, owing to increased expenses, more had
been paid out than usual, and there was a deﬁcit. But the doctor, a celebrated
Petersburg doctor, who was an intimate acquaintance of Alexey Alexandrovitch,
took up a great deal of time. Alexey Alexandrovitch had not expected him that
day, and was surprised at his visit, and still more so when the doctor questioned
him very carefully about his health, listened to his breathing, and tapped at his
liver. Alexey Alexandrovitch did not know that his friend Lidia Ivanovna, noticing
that he was not as well as usual that year, had begged the doctor to go and examine
him. "Do this for my sake," the Countess Lidia Ivanovna had said to him.
"I will do it for the sake of Russia, countess," replied the doctor.
"A priceless man!" said the Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
e doctor was extremely dissatisﬁed with Alexey Alexandrovitch. He

clxxxv
found the liver considerably enlarged, and the digestive powers weakened, while
the course of mineral waters had been quite without eﬀect. He prescribed more
physical exercise as far as possible, and as far as possible less mental strain, and
above all no worry—in other words, just what was as much out of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s power as abstaining from breathing. en he withdrew, leaving in
Alexey Alexandrovitch an unpleasant sense that something was wrong with him,
and that there was no chance of curing it.
As he was coming away, the doctor chanced to meet on the staircase an
acquaintance of his, Sludin, who was secretary of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s department. ey had been comrades at the university, and though they rarely met,
they thought highly of each other and were excellent friends, and so there was no
one to whom the doctor would have given his opinion of a patient so freely as to
Sludin.
"How glad I am you’ve been seeing him!" said Sludin. "He’s not well, and I
fancy…. Well, what do you think of him?"
"I’ll tell you," said the doctor, beckoning over Sludin’s head to his coachman
to bring the carriage round. "It’s just this," said the doctor, taking a ﬁnger of his
kid glove in his white hands and pulling it, "if you don’t strain the strings, and
then try to break them, you’ll ﬁnd it a diﬃcult job; but strain a string to its very
utmost, and the mere weight of one ﬁnger on the strained string will snap it. And
with his close assiduity, his conscientious devotion to his work, he’s strained to
the utmost; and there’s some outside burden weighing on him, and not a light
one," concluded the doctor, raising his eyebrows signiﬁcantly. "Will you be at the
races?" he added, as he sank into his seat in the carriage.
"Yes, yes, to be sure; it does waste a lot of time," the doctor responded
vaguely to some reply of Sludin’s he had not caught.
Directly aer the doctor, who had taken up so much time, came the celebrated traveler, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, by means of the pamphlet he had
only just ﬁnished reading and his previous acquaintance with the subject, impressed the traveler by the depth of his knowledge of the subject and the breadth
and enlightenment of his view of it.
At the same time as the traveler there was announced a provincial marshal
of nobility on a visit to Petersburg, with whom Alexey Alexandrovitch had to
have some conversation. Aer his departure, he had to ﬁnish the daily routine of
business with his secretary, and then he still had to drive round to call on a certain
great personage on a maer of grave and serious import. Alexey Alexandrovitch
only just managed to be back by ﬁve o’clock, his dinner-hour, and aer dining
with his secretary, he invited him to drive with him to his country villa and to the
races.
ough he did not acknowledge it to himself, Alexey Alexandrovitch always

clxxxvi
tried nowadays to secure the presence of a third person in his interviews with his
wife.

Chapter 
Anna was upstairs, standing before the looking glass, and, with Annushka’s assistance, pinning the last ribbon on her gown when she heard carriage wheels
crunching the gravel at the entrance.
"It’s too early for Betsy," she thought, and glancing out of the window she
caught sight of the carriage and the black hat of Alexey Alexandrovitch, and the
ears that she knew so well sticking up each side of it. "How unlucky! Can he be
going to stay the night?" she wondered, and the thought of all that might come
of such a chance struck her as so awful and terrible that, without dwelling on it
for a moment, she went down to meet him with a bright and radiant face; and
conscious of the presence of that spirit of falsehood and deceit in herself that she
had come to know of late, she abandoned herself to that spirit and began talking,
hardly knowing what she was saying.
"Ah, how nice of you!" she said, giving her husband her hand, and greeting
Sludin, who was like one of the family, with a smile. "You’re staying the night, I
hope?" was the ﬁrst word the spirit of falsehood prompted her to uer; "and now
we’ll go together. Only it’s a pity I’ve promised Betsy. She’s coming for me."
Alexey Alexandrovitch knit his brows at Betsy’s name.
"Oh, I’m not going to separate the inseparables," he said in his usual bantering tone. "I’m going with Mihail Vassilievitch. I’m ordered exercise by the doctors
too. I’ll walk, and fancy myself at the springs again."
"ere’s no hurry," said Anna. "Would you like tea?"
She rang.
"Bring in tea, and tell Seryozha that Alexey Alexandrovitch is here. Well,
tell me, how have you been? Mihail Vassilievitch, you’ve not been to see me
before. Look how lovely it is out on the terrace," she said, turning ﬁrst to one and
then to the other.
She spoke very simply and naturally, but too much and too fast. She was
the more aware of this from noticing in the inquisitive look Mihail Vassilievitch
turned on her that he was, as it were, keeping watch on her.
Mihail Vassilievitch promptly went out on the terrace.
She sat down beside her husband.
"You don’t look quite well," she said.
"Yes," he said; "the doctor’s been with me today and wasted an hour of my
time. I feel that some one of our friends must have sent him: my health’s so

clxxxvii
precious, it seems."
"No; what did he say?"
She questioned him about his health and what he had been doing, and tried
to persuade him to take a rest and come out to her.
All this she said brightly, rapidly, and with a peculiar brilliance in her eyes.
But Alexey Alexandrovitch did not now aach any special signiﬁcance to this
tone of hers. He heard only her words and gave them only the direct sense they
bore. And he answered simply, though jestingly. ere was nothing remarkable
in all this conversation, but never aer could Anna recall this brief scene without
an agonizing pang of shame.
Seryozha came in preceded by his governess. If Alexey Alexandrovitch had
allowed himself to observe he would have noticed the timid and bewildered eyes
with which Seryozha glanced ﬁrst at his father and then at his mother. But he
would not see anything, and he did not see it.
"Ah, the young man! He’s grown. Really, he’s geing quite a man. How are
you, young man?"
And he gave his hand to the scared child. Seryozha had been shy of his
father before, and now, ever since Alexey Alexandrovitch had taken to calling
him young man, and since that insoluble question had occurred to him whether
Vronsky were a friend or a foe, he avoided his father. He looked round towards his
mother as though seeking shelter. It was only with his mother that he was at ease.
Meanwhile, Alexey Alexandrovitch was holding his son by the shoulder while he
was speaking to the governess, and Seryozha was so miserably uncomfortable
that Anna saw he was on the point of tears.
Anna, who had ﬂushed a lile the instant her son came in, noticing that
Seryozha was uncomfortable, got up hurriedly, took Alexey Alexandrovitch’s
hand from her son’s shoulder, and kissing the boy, led him out onto the terrace,
and quickly came back.
"It’s time to start, though," said she, glancing at her watch. "How is it Betsy
doesn’t come?…"
"Yes," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, and geing up, he folded his hands and
cracked his ﬁngers. "I’ve come to bring you some money, too, for nightingales,
we know, can’t live on fairy tales," he said. "You want it, I expect?"
"No, I don’t … yes, I do," she said, not looking at him, and crimsoning to the
roots of her hair. "But you’ll come back here aer the races, I suppose?"
"Oh, yes!" answered Alexey Alexandrovitch. "And here’s the glory of Peterhof, Princess Tverskaya," he added, looking out of the window at the elegant English carriage with the tiny seats placed extremely high. "What elegance! Charming! Well, let us be starting too, then."
Princess Tverskaya did not get out of her carriage, but her groom, in high

clxxxviii
boots, a cape, and black hat, darted out at the entrance.
"I’m going; good-bye!" said Anna, and kissing her son, she went up to
Alexey Alexandrovitch and held out her hand to him. "It was ever so nice of
you to come."
Alexey Alexandrovitch kissed her hand.
"Well, au revoir, then! You’ll come back for some tea; that’s delightful!" she
said, and went out, gay and radiant. But as soon as she no longer saw him, she
was aware of the spot on her hand that his lips had touched, and she shuddered
with repulsion.

Chapter 
When Alexey Alexandrovitch reached the race-course, Anna was already siing
in the pavilion beside Betsy, in that pavilion where all the highest society had
gathered. She caught sight of her husband in the distance. Two men, her husband and her lover, were the two centers of her existence, and unaided by her
external senses she was aware of their nearness. She was aware of her husband
approaching a long way oﬀ, and she could not help following him in the surging
crowd in the midst of which he was moving. She watched his progress towards
the pavilion, saw him now responding condescendingly to an ingratiating bow,
now exchanging friendly, nonchalant greetings with his equals, now assiduously
trying to catch the eye of some great one of this world, and taking oﬀ his big
round hat that squeezed the tips of his ears. All these ways of his she knew, and
all were hateful to her. "Nothing but ambition, nothing but the desire to get on,
that’s all there is in his soul," she thought; "as for these loy ideals, love of culture,
religion, they are only so many tools for geing on."
From his glances towards the ladies’ pavilion (he was staring straight at her,
but did not distinguish his wife in the sea of muslin, ribbons, feathers, parasols and
ﬂowers) she saw that he was looking for her, but she purposely avoided noticing
him.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch!" Princess Betsy called to him; "I’m sure you don’t
see your wife: here she is."
He smiled his chilly smile.
"ere’s so much splendor here that one’s eyes are dazzled," he said, and he
went into the pavilion. He smiled to his wife as a man should smile on meeting
his wife aer only just parting from her, and greeted the princess and other acquaintances, giving to each what was due—that is to say, jesting with the ladies
and dealing out friendly greetings among the men. Below, near the pavilion, was
standing an adjutant-general of whom Alexey Alexandrovitch had a high opin-

clxxxix
ion, noted for his intelligence and culture. Alexey Alexandrovitch entered into
conversation with him.
ere was an interval between the races, and so nothing hindered conversation. e adjutant-general expressed his disapproval of races. Alexey Alexandrovitch replied defending them. Anna heard his high, measured tones, not losing
one word, and every word struck her as false, and stabbed her ears with pain.
When the three-mile steeplechase was beginning, she bent forward and
gazed with ﬁxed eyes at Vronsky as he went up to his horse and mounted, and at
the same time she heard that loathsome, never-ceasing voice of her husband. She
was in an agony of terror for Vronsky, but a still greater agony was the neverceasing, as it seemed to her, stream of her husband’s shrill voice with its familiar
intonations.
"I’m a wicked woman, a lost woman," she thought; "but I don’t like lying,
I can’t endure falsehood, while as for him (her husband) it’s the breath of his
life—falsehood. He knows all about it, he sees it all; what does he care if he can
talk so calmly? If he were to kill me, if he were to kill Vronsky, I might respect him.
No, all he wants is falsehood and propriety," Anna said to herself, not considering
exactly what it was she wanted of her husband, and how she would have liked
to see him behave. She did not understand either that Alexey Alexandrovitch’s
peculiar loquacity that day, so exasperating to her, was merely the expression of
his inward distress and uneasiness. As a child that has been hurt skips about,
puing all his muscles into movement to drown the pain, in the same way Alexey
Alexandrovitch needed mental exercise to drown the thoughts of his wife that
in her presence and in Vronsky’s, and with the continual iteration of his name,
would force themselves on his aention. And it was as natural for him to talk
well and cleverly, as it is natural for a child to skip about. He was saying:
"Danger in the races of oﬃcers, of cavalry men, is an essential element in the
race. If England can point to the most brilliant feats of cavalry in military history,
it is simply owing to the fact that she has historically developed this force both in
beasts and in men. Sport has, in my opinion, a great value, and as is always the
case, we see nothing but what is most superﬁcial."
"It’s not superﬁcial," said Princess Tverskaya. "One of the oﬃcers, they say,
has broken two ribs."
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled his smile, which uncovered his teeth, but revealed nothing more.
"We’ll admit, princess, that that’s not superﬁcial," he said, "but internal. But
that’s not the point," and he turned again to the general with whom he was talking seriously; "we mustn’t forget that those who are taking part in the race are
military men, who have chosen that career, and one must allow that every calling
has its disagreeable side. It forms an integral part of the duties of an oﬃcer. Low

cxc
sports, such as prize-ﬁghting or Spanish bull-ﬁghts, are a sign of barbarity. But
specialized trials of skill are a sign of development."
"No, I shan’t come another time; it’s too upseing," said Princess Betsy.
"Isn’t it, Anna?"
"It is upseing, but one can’t tear oneself away," said another lady. "If I’d
been a Roman woman I should never have missed a single circus."
Anna said nothing, and keeping her opera glass up, gazed always at the
same spot.
At that moment a tall general walked through the pavilion. Breaking oﬀ
what he was saying, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up hurriedly, though with dignity,
and bowed low to the general.
"You’re not racing?" the oﬃcer asked, chaﬃng him.
"My race is a harder one," Alexey Alexandrovitch responded deferentially.
And though the answer meant nothing, the general looked as though he had
heard a wiy remark from a wiy man, and fully relished la pointe de la sauce.
"ere are two aspects," Alexey Alexandrovitch resumed: "those who take
part and those who look on; and love for such spectacles is an unmistakable proof
of a low degree of development in the spectator, I admit, but…"
"Princess, bets!" sounded Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice from below, addressing Betsy. "Who’s your favorite?"
"Anna and I are for Kuzovlev," replied Betsy.
"I’m for Vronsky. A pair of gloves?"
"Done!"
"But it is a prey sight, isn’t it?"
Alexey Alexandrovitch paused while there was talking about him, but he
began again directly.
"I admit that manly sports do not…" he was continuing.
But at that moment the racers started, and all conversation ceased. Alexey
Alexandrovitch too was silent, and everyone stood up and turned towards the
stream. Alexey Alexandrovitch took no interest in the race, and so he did not
watch the racers, but fell listlessly to scanning the spectators with his weary eyes.
His eyes rested upon Anna.
Her face was white and set. She was obviously seeing nothing and no one
but one man. Her hand had convulsively clutched her fan, and she held her breath.
He looked at her and hastily turned away, scrutinizing other faces.
"But here’s this lady too, and others very much moved as well; it’s very
natural," Alexey Alexandrovitch told himself. He tried not to look at her, but
unconsciously his eyes were drawn to her. He examined that face again, trying
not to read what was so plainly wrien on it, and against his own will, with horror
read on it what he did not want to know.

cxci
e ﬁrst fall—Kuzovlev’s, at the stream—agitated everyone, but Alexey
Alexandrovitch saw distinctly on Anna’s pale, triumphant face that the man she
was watching had not fallen. When, aer Mahotin and Vronsky had cleared the
worst barrier, the next oﬃcer had been thrown straight on his head at it and
fatally injured, and a shudder of horror passed over the whole public, Alexey
Alexandrovitch saw that Anna did not even notice it, and had some diﬃculty in
realizing what they were talking of about her. But more and more oen, and with
greater persistence, he watched her. Anna, wholly engrossed as she was with the
race, became aware of her husband’s cold eyes ﬁxed upon her from one side.
She glanced round for an instant, looked inquiringly at him, and with a
slight frown turned away again.
"Ah, I don’t care!" she seemed to say to him, and she did not once glance at
him again.
e race was an unlucky one, and of the seventeen oﬃcers who rode in
it more than half were thrown and hurt. Towards the end of the race everyone
was in a state of agitation, which was intensiﬁed by the fact that the Tsar was
displeased.

Chapter 
Everyone was loudly expressing disapprobation, everyone was repeating a phrase
some one had uered—"e lions and gladiators will be the next thing," and everyone was feeling horriﬁed; so that when Vronsky fell to the ground, and Anna
moaned aloud, there was nothing very out of the way in it. But aerwards a
change came over Anna’s face which really was beyond decorum. She uerly
lost her head. She began ﬂuering like a caged bird, at one moment would have
got up and moved away, at the next turned to Betsy.
"Let us go, let us go!" she said.
But Betsy did not hear her. She was bending down, talking to a general who
had come up to her.
Alexey Alexandrovitch went up to Anna and courteously oﬀered her his
arm.
"Let us go, if you like," he said in French, but Anna was listening to the
general and did not notice her husband.
"He’s broken his leg too, so they say," the general was saying. "is is beyond
everything."
Without answering her husband, Anna lied her opera glass and gazed towards the place where Vronsky had fallen; but it was so far oﬀ, and there was such
a crowd of people about it, that she could make out nothing. She laid down the

cxcii
opera glass, and would have moved away, but at that moment an oﬃcer galloped
up and made some announcement to the Tsar. Anna craned forward, listening.
"Stiva! Stiva!" she cried to her brother.
But her brother did not hear her. Again she would have moved away.
"Once more I oﬀer you my arm if you want to be going," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, reaching towards her hand.
She drew back from him with aversion, and without looking in his face
answered:
"No, no, let me be, I’ll stay."
She saw now that from the place of Vronsky’s accident an oﬃcer was running across the course towards the pavilion. Betsy waved her handkerchief to
him. e oﬃcer brought the news that the rider was not killed, but the horse had
broken its back.
On hearing this Anna sat down hurriedly, and hid her face in her fan. Alexey
Alexandrovitch saw that she was weeping, and could not control her tears, nor
even the sobs that were shaking her bosom. Alexey Alexandrovitch stood so as
to screen her, giving her time to recover herself.
"For the third time I oﬀer you my arm," he said to her aer a lile time,
turning to her. Anna gazed at him and did not know what to say. Princess Betsy
came to her rescue.
"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch; I brought Anna and I promised to take her
home," put in Betsy.
"Excuse me, princess," he said, smiling courteously but looking her very
ﬁrmly in the face, "but I see that Anna’s not very well, and I wish her to come
home with me."
Anna looked about her in a frightened way, got up submissively, and laid
her hand on her husband’s arm.
"I’ll send to him and ﬁnd out, and let you know," Betsy whispered to her.
As they le the pavilion, Alexey Alexandrovitch, as always, talked to those
he met, and Anna had, as always, to talk and answer; but she was uerly beside
herself, and moved hanging on her husband’s arm as though in a dream.
"Is he killed or not? Is it true? Will he come or not? Shall I see him today?"
she was thinking.
She took her seat in her husband’s carriage in silence, and in silence drove
out of the crowd of carriages. In spite of all he had seen, Alexey Alexandrovitch
still did not allow himself to consider his wife’s real condition. He merely saw the
outward symptoms. He saw that she was behaving unbecomingly, and considered
it his duty to tell her so. But it was very diﬃcult for him not to say more, to tell her
nothing but that. He opened his mouth to tell her she had behaved unbecomingly,
but he could not help saying something uerly diﬀerent.

cxciii
"What an inclination we all have, though, for these cruel spectacles," he said.
"I observe…"
"Eh? I don’t understand," said Anna contemptuously.
He was oﬀended, and at once began to say what he had meant to say.
"I am obliged to tell you," he began.
"So now we are to have it out," she thought, and she felt frightened.
"I am obliged to tell you that your behavior has been unbecoming today," he
said to her in French.
"In what way has my behavior been unbecoming?" she said aloud, turning
her head swily and looking him straight in the face, not with the bright expression that seemed covering something, but with a look of determination, under
which she concealed with diﬃculty the dismay she was feeling.
"Mind," he said, pointing to the open window opposite the coachman.
He got up and pulled up the window.
"What did you consider unbecoming?" she repeated.
"e despair you were unable to conceal at the accident to one of the riders."
He waited for her to answer, but she was silent, looking straight before her.
"I have already begged you so to conduct yourself in society that even malicious tongues can ﬁnd nothing to say against you. ere was a time when I spoke
of your inward aitude, but I am not speaking of that now. Now I speak only of
your external aitude. You have behaved improperly, and I would wish it not to
occur again."
She did not hear half of what he was saying; she felt panic-stricken before
him, and was thinking whether it was true that Vronsky was not killed. Was it of
him they were speaking when they said the rider was unhurt, but the horse had
broken its back? She merely smiled with a pretense of irony when he ﬁnished, and
made no reply, because she had not heard what he said. Alexey Alexandrovitch
had begun to speak boldly, but as he realized plainly what he was speaking of,
the dismay she was feeling infected him too. He saw the smile, and a strange
misapprehension came over him.
"She is smiling at my suspicions. Yes, she will tell me directly what she told
me before; that there is no foundation for my suspicions, that it’s absurd."
At that moment, when the revelation of everything was hanging over him,
there was nothing he expected so much as that she would answer mockingly as
before that his suspicions were absurd and uerly groundless. So terrible to him
was what he knew that now he was ready to believe anything. But the expression
of her face, scared and gloomy, did not now promise even deception.
"Possibly I was mistaken," said he. "If so, I beg your pardon."
"No, you were not mistaken," she said deliberately, looking desperately into
his cold face. "You were not mistaken. I was, and I could not help being in despair.

cxciv
I hear you, but I am thinking of him. I love him, I am his mistress; I can’t bear
you; I’m afraid of you, and I hate you…. You can do what you like to me."
And dropping back into the corner of the carriage, she broke into sobs, hiding her face in her hands. Alexey Alexandrovitch did not stir, and kept looking
straight before him. But his whole face suddenly bore the solemn rigidity of the
dead, and his expression did not change during the whole time of the drive home.
On reaching the house he turned his head to her, still with the same expression.
"Very well! But I expect a strict observance of the external forms of propriety till such time"—his voice shook—"as I may take measures to secure my honor
and communicate them to you."
He got out ﬁrst and helped her to get out. Before the servants he pressed
her hand, took his seat in the carriage, and drove back to Petersburg. Immediately
aerwards a footman came from Princess Betsy and brought Anna a note.
"I sent to Alexey to ﬁnd out how he is, and he writes me he is quite well and
unhurt, but in despair."
"So he will be here," she thought. "What a good thing I told him all!"
She glanced at her watch. She had still three hours to wait, and the memories of their last meeting set her blood in ﬂame.
"My God, how light it is! It’s dreadful, but I do love to see his face, and I do
love this fantastic light…. My husband! Oh! yes…. Well, thank God! everything’s
over with him."

Chapter 
In the lile German watering-place to which the Shtcherbatskys had betaken
themselves, as in all places indeed where people are gathered together, the usual
process, as it were, of the crystallization of society went on, assigning to each
member of that society a deﬁnite and unalterable place. Just as the particle of
water in frost, deﬁnitely and unalterably, takes the special form of the crystal of
snow, so each new person that arrived at the springs was at once placed in his
special place.
Fürst Shtcherbatsky, sammt Gemahlin und Toter, by the apartments they
took, and from their name and from the friends they made, were immediately
crystallized into a deﬁnite place marked out for them.
ere was visiting the watering-place that year a real German Fürstin, in
consequence of which the crystallizing process went on more vigorously than
ever. Princess Shtcherbatskaya wished, above everything, to present her daughter to this German princess, and the day aer their arrival she duly performed
this rite. Kiy made a low and graceful curtsey in the very simple, that is to say,

cxcv
very elegant frock that had been ordered her from Paris. e German princess
said, "I hope the roses will soon come back to this prey lile face," and for the
Shtcherbatskys certain deﬁnite lines of existence were at once laid down from
which there was no departing. e Shtcherbatskys made the acquaintance too
of the family of an English Lady Somebody, and of a German countess and her
son, wounded in the last war, and of a learned Swede, and of M. Canut and his
sister. But yet inevitably the Shtcherbatskys were thrown most into the society of
a Moscow lady, Marya Yevgenyevna Rtishtcheva and her daughter, whom Kiy
disliked, because she had fallen ill, like herself, over a love aﬀair, and a Moscow
colonel, whom Kiy had known from childhood, and always seen in uniform and
epaulets, and who now, with his lile eyes and his open neck and ﬂowered cravat, was uncommonly ridiculous and tedious, because there was no geing rid
of him. When all this was so ﬁrmly established, Kiy began to be very much
bored, especially as the prince went away to Carlsbad and she was le alone with
her mother. She took no interest in the people she knew, feeling that nothing
fresh would come of them. Her chief mental interest in the watering-place consisted in watching and making theories about the people she did not know. It was
characteristic of Kiy that she always imagined everything in people in the most
favorable light possible, especially so in those she did not know. And now as she
made surmises as to who people were, what were their relations to one another,
and what they were like, Kiy endowed them with the most marvelous and noble
characters, and found conﬁrmation of her idea in her observations.
Of these people the one that aracted her most was a Russian girl who had
come to the watering-place with an invalid Russian lady, Madame Stahl, as everyone called her. Madame Stahl belonged to the highest society, but she was so ill
that she could not walk, and only on exceptionally ﬁne days made her appearance
at the springs in an invalid carriage. But it was not so much from ill-health as
from pride—so Princess Shtcherbatskaya interpreted it—that Madame Stahl had
not made the acquaintance of anyone among the Russians there. e Russian
girl looked aer Madame Stahl, and besides that, she was, as Kiy observed, on
friendly terms with all the invalids who were seriously ill, and there were many
of them at the springs, and looked aer them in the most natural way. is Russian girl was not, as Kiy gathered, related to Madame Stahl, nor was she a paid
aendant. Madame Stahl called her Varenka, and other people called her "Mademoiselle Varenka." Apart from the interest Kiy took in this girl’s relations with
Madame Stahl and with other unknown persons, Kiy, as oen happened, felt an
inexplicable araction to Mademoiselle Varenka, and was aware when their eyes
met that she too liked her.
Of Mademoiselle Varenka one would not say that she had passed her ﬁrst
youth, but she was, as it were, a creature without youth; she might have been

cxcvi
taken for nineteen or for thirty. If her features were criticized separately, she was
handsome rather than plain, in spite of the sickly hue of her face. She would
have been a good ﬁgure, too, if it had not been for her extreme thinness and the
size of her head, which was too large for her medium height. But she was not
likely to be aractive to men. She was like a ﬁne ﬂower, already past its bloom
and without fragrance, though the petals were still unwithered. Moreover, she
would have been unaractive to men also from the lack of just what Kiy had
too much of—of the suppressed ﬁre of vitality, and the consciousness of her own
aractiveness.
She always seemed absorbed in work about which there could be no doubt,
and so it seemed she could not take interest in anything outside it. It was just this
contrast with her own position that was for Kiy the great araction of Mademoiselle Varenka. Kiy felt that in her, in her manner of life, she would ﬁnd an
example of what she was now so painfully seeking: interest in life, a dignity in
life—apart from the worldly relations of girls with men, which so revolted Kiy,
and appeared to her now as a shameful hawking about of goods in search of a
purchaser. e more aentively Kiy watched her unknown friend, the more
convinced she was this girl was the perfect creature she fancied her, and the more
eagerly she wished to make her acquaintance.
e two girls used to meet several times a day, and every time they met,
Kiy’s eyes said: "Who are you? What are you? Are you really the exquisite
creature I imagine you to be? But for goodness’ sake don’t suppose," her eyes
added, "that I would force my acquaintance on you, I simply admire you and like
you." "I like you too, and you’re very, very sweet. And I should like you beer
still, if I had time," answered the eyes of the unknown girl. Kiy saw indeed, that
she was always busy. Either she was taking the children of a Russian family home
from the springs, or fetching a shawl for a sick lady, and wrapping her up in it,
or trying to interest an irritable invalid, or selecting and buying cakes for tea for
someone.
Soon aer the arrival of the Shtcherbatskys there appeared in the morning crowd at the springs two persons who aracted universal and unfavorable
aention. ese were a tall man with a stooping ﬁgure, and huge hands, in an
old coat too short for him, with black, simple, and yet terrible eyes, and a pockmarked, kind-looking woman, very badly and tastelessly dressed. Recognizing
these persons as Russians, Kiy had already in her imagination begun constructing a delightful and touching romance about them. But the princess, having ascertained from the visitors’ list that this was Nikolay Levin and Marya Nikolaevna,
explained to Kiy what a bad man this Levin was, and all her fancies about these
two people vanished. Not so much from what her mother told her, as from the
fact that it was Konstantin’s brother, this pair suddenly seemed to Kiy intensely

cxcvii
unpleasant. is Levin, with his continual twitching of his head, aroused in her
now an irrepressible feeling of disgust.
It seemed to her that his big, terrible eyes, which persistently pursued her,
expressed a feeling of hatred and contempt, and she tried to avoid meeting him.

Chapter 
It was a wet day; it had been raining all the morning, and the invalids, with their
parasols, had ﬂocked into the arcades.
Kiy was walking there with her mother and the Moscow colonel, smart
and jaunty in his European coat, bought ready-made at Frankfort. ey were
walking on one side of the arcade, trying to avoid Levin, who was walking on the
other side. Varenka, in her dark dress, in a black hat with a turn-down brim, was
walking up and down the whole length of the arcade with a blind Frenchwoman,
and, every time she met Kiy, they exchanged friendly glances.
"Mamma, couldn’t I speak to her?" said Kiy, watching her unknown friend,
and noticing that she was going up to the spring, and that they might come there
together.
"Oh, if you want to so much, I’ll ﬁnd out about her ﬁrst and make her acquaintance myself," answered her mother. "What do you see in her out of the way?
A companion, she must be. If you like, I’ll make acquaintance with Madame Stahl;
I used to know her belle-soeur," added the princess, liing her head haughtily.
Kiy knew that the princess was oﬀended that Madame Stahl had seemed
to avoid making her acquaintance. Kiy did not insist.
"How wonderfully sweet she is!" she said, gazing at Varenka just as she
handed a glass to the Frenchwoman. "Look how natural and sweet it all is."
"It’s so funny to see your engouements," said the princess. "No, we’d beer
go back," she added, noticing Levin coming towards them with his companion and
a German doctor, to whom he was talking very noisily and angrily.
ey turned to go back, when suddenly they heard, not noisy talk, but shouting. Levin, stopping short, was shouting at the doctor, and the doctor, too, was
excited. A crowd gathered about them. e princess and Kiy beat a hasty retreat,
while the colonel joined the crowd to ﬁnd out what was the maer.
A few minutes later the colonel overtook them.
"What was it?" inquired the princess.
"Scandalous and disgraceful!" answered the colonel. "e one thing to be
dreaded is meeting Russians abroad. at tall gentleman was abusing the doctor,
ﬂinging all sorts of insults at him because he wasn’t treating him quite as he liked,
and he began waving his stick at him. It’s simply a scandal!"

cxcviii
"Oh, how unpleasant!" said the princess. "Well, and how did it end?"
"Luckily at that point that … the one in the mushroom hat … intervened. A
Russian lady, I think she is," said the colonel.
"Mademoiselle Varenka?" asked Kiy.
"Yes, yes. She came to the rescue before anyone; she took the man by the
arm and led him away."
"ere, mamma," said Kiy; "you wonder that I’m enthusiastic about her."
e next day, as she watched her unknown friend, Kiy noticed that Mademoiselle Varenka was already on the same terms with Levin and his companion
as with her other protégés. She went up to them, entered into conversation with
them, and served as interpreter for the woman, who could not speak any foreign
language.
Kiy began to entreat her mother still more urgently to let her make friends
with Varenka. And, disagreeable as it was to the princess to seem to take the ﬁrst
step in wishing to make the acquaintance of Madame Stahl, who thought ﬁt to give
herself airs, she made inquiries about Varenka, and, having ascertained particulars
about her tending to prove that there could be no harm though lile good in the
acquaintance, she herself approached Varenka and made acquaintance with her.
Choosing a time when her daughter had gone to the spring, while Varenka
had stopped outside the baker’s, the princess went up to her.
"Allow me to make your acquaintance," she said, with her digniﬁed smile.
"My daughter has lost her heart to you," she said. "Possibly you do not know me.
I am…"
"at feeling is more than reciprocal, princess," Varenka answered hurriedly.
"What a good deed you did yesterday to our poor compatriot!" said the
princess.
Varenka ﬂushed a lile. "I don’t remember. I don’t think I did anything,"
she said.
"Why, you saved that Levin from disagreeable consequences."
"Yes, sa compagne called me, and I tried to pacify him, he’s very ill, and was
dissatisﬁed with the doctor. I’m used to looking aer such invalids."
"Yes, I’ve heard you live at Mentone with your aunt—I think—Madame Stahl:
I used to know her belle-soeur."
"No, she’s not my aunt. I call her mamma, but I am not related to her; I was
brought up by her," answered Varenka, ﬂushing a lile again.
is was so simply said, and so sweet was the truthful and candid expression
of her face, that the princess saw why Kiy had taken such a fancy to Varenka.
"Well, and what’s this Levin going to do?" asked the princess.
"He’s going away," answered Varenka.
At that instant Kiy came up from the spring beaming with delight that her

cxcix
mother had become acquainted with her unknown friend.
"Well, see, Kiy, your intense desire to make friends with Mademoiselle. .
."
"Varenka," Varenka put in smiling, "that’s what everyone calls me."
Kiy blushed with pleasure, and slowly, without speaking, pressed her new
friend’s hand, which did not respond to her pressure, but lay motionless in her
hand. e hand did not respond to her pressure, but the face of Mademoiselle
Varenka glowed with a so, glad, though rather mournful smile, that showed
large but handsome teeth.
"I have long wished for this too," she said.
"But you are so busy."
"Oh, no, I’m not at all busy," answered Varenka, but at that moment she had
to leave her new friends because two lile Russian girls, children of an invalid,
ran up to her.
"Varenka, mamma’s calling!" they cried.
And Varenka went aer them.

Chapter 
e particulars which the princess had learned in regard to Varenka’s past and
her relations with Madame Stahl were as follows:
Madame Stahl, of whom some people said that she had worried her husband out of his life, while others said it was he who had made her wretched by
his immoral behavior, had always been a woman of weak health and enthusiastic
temperament. When, aer her separation from her husband, she gave birth to
her only child, the child had died almost immediately, and the family of Madame
Stahl, knowing her sensibility, and fearing the news would kill her, had substituted another child, a baby born the same night and in the same house in Petersburg, the daughter of the chief cook of the Imperial Household. is was Varenka.
Madame Stahl learned later on that Varenka was not her own child, but she went
on bringing her up, especially as very soon aerwards Varenka had not a relation
of her own living. Madame Stahl had now been living more than ten years continuously abroad, in the south, never leaving her couch. And some people said that
Madame Stahl had made her social position as a philanthropic, highly religious
woman; other people said she really was at heart the highly ethical being, living
for nothing but the good of her fellow creatures, which she represented herself to
be. No one knew what her faith was—Catholic, Protestant, or Orthodox. But one
fact was indubitable—she was in amicable relations with the highest dignitaries
of all the churches and sects.

cc
Varenka lived with her all the while abroad, and everyone who knew
Madame Stahl knew and liked Mademoiselle Varenka, as everyone called her.
Having learned all these facts, the princess found nothing to object to in
her daughter’s intimacy with Varenka, more especially as Varenka’s breeding and
education were of the best—she spoke French and English extremely well—and
what was of the most weight, brought a message from Madame Stahl expressing
her regret that she was prevented by her ill health from making the acquaintance
of the princess.
Aer geing to know Varenka, Kiy became more and more fascinated by
her friend, and every day she discovered new virtues in her.
e princess, hearing that Varenka had a good voice, asked her to come and
sing to them in the evening.
"Kiy plays, and we have a piano; not a good one, it’s true, but you will give
us so much pleasure," said the princess with her aﬀected smile, which Kiy disliked
particularly just then, because she noticed that Varenka had no inclination to sing.
Varenka came, however, in the evening and brought a roll of music with her. e
princess had invited Marya Yevgenyevna and her daughter and the colonel.
Varenka seemed quite unaﬀected by there being persons present she did not
know, and she went directly to the piano. She could not accompany herself, but
she could sing music at sight very well. Kiy, who played well, accompanied her.
"You have an extraordinary talent," the princess said to her aer Varenka
had sung the ﬁrst song extremely well.
Marya Yevgenyevna and her daughter expressed their thanks and admiration.
"Look," said the colonel, looking out of the window, "what an audience has
collected to listen to you." ere actually was quite a considerable crowd under
the windows.
"I am very glad it gives you pleasure," Varenka answered simply.
Kiy looked with pride at her friend. She was enchanted by her talent,
and her voice, and her face, but most of all by her manner, by the way Varenka
obviously thought nothing of her singing and was quite unmoved by their praises.
She seemed only to be asking: "Am I to sing again, or is that enough?"
"If it had been I," thought Kiy, "how proud I should have been! How delighted I should have been to see that crowd under the windows! But she’s uerly
unmoved by it. Her only motive is to avoid refusing and to please mamma. What
is there in her? What is it gives her the power to look down on everything, to
be calm independently of everything? How I should like to know it and to learn
it of her!" thought Kiy, gazing into her serene face. e princess asked Varenka
to sing again, and Varenka sang another song, also smoothly, distinctly, and well,
standing erect at the piano and beating time on it with her thin, dark-skinned

cci
hand.
e next song in the book was an Italian one. Kiy played the opening bars,
and looked round at Varenka.
"Let’s skip that," said Varenka, ﬂushing a lile. Kiy let her eyes rest on
Varenka’s face, with a look of dismay and inquiry.
"Very well, the next one," she said hurriedly, turning over the pages, and at
once feeling that there was something connected with the song.
"No," answered Varenka with a smile, laying her hand on the music, "no,
let’s have that one." And she sang it just as quietly, as coolly, and as well as the
others.
When she had ﬁnished, they all thanked her again, and went oﬀ to tea. Kiy
and Varenka went out into the lile garden that adjoined the house.
"Am I right, that you have some reminiscences connected with that song?"
said Kiy. "Don’t tell me," she added hastily, "only say if I’m right."
"No, why not? I’ll tell you simply," said Varenka, and, without waiting for
a reply, she went on: "Yes, it brings up memories, once painful ones. I cared for
someone once, and I used to sing him that song."
Kiy with big, wide-open eyes gazed silently, sympathetically at Varenka.
"I cared for him, and he cared for me; but his mother did not wish it, and he
married another girl. He’s living now not far from us, and I see him sometimes.
You didn’t think I had a love story too," she said, and there was a faint gleam in
her handsome face of that ﬁre which Kiy felt must once have glowed all over
her.
"I didn’t think so? Why, if I were a man, I could never care for anyone else
aer knowing you. Only I can’t understand how he could, to please his mother,
forget you and make you unhappy; he had no heart."
"Oh, no, he’s a very good man, and I’m not unhappy; quite the contrary,
I’m very happy. Well, so we shan’t be singing any more now," she added, turning
towards the house.
"How good you are! how good you are!" cried Kiy, and stopping her, she
kissed her. "If I could only be even a lile like you!"
"Why should you be like anyone? You’re nice as you are," said Varenka,
smiling her gentle, weary smile.
"No, I’m not nice at all. Come, tell me…. Stop a minute, let’s sit down," said
Kiy, making her sit down again beside her. "Tell me, isn’t it humiliating to think
that a man has disdained your love, that he hasn’t cared for it?…"
"But he didn’t disdain it; I believe he cared for me, but he was a dutiful son…"
"Yes, but if it hadn’t been on account of his mother, if it had been his own
doing?…" said Kiy, feeling she was giving away her secret, and that her face,
burning with the ﬂush of shame, had betrayed her already.

ccii
"In that case he would have done wrong, and I should not have regreed
him," answered Varenka, evidently realizing that they were now talking not of
her, but of Kiy.
"But the humiliation," said Kiy, "the humiliation one can never forget, can
never forget," she said, remembering her look at the last ball during the pause in
the music.
"Where is the humiliation? Why, you did nothing wrong?"
"Worse than wrong—shameful."
Varenka shook her head and laid her hand on Kiy’s hand.
"Why, what is there shameful?" she said. "You didn’t tell a man, who didn’t
care for you, that you loved him, did you?"
"Of course not; I never said a word, but he knew it. No, no, there are looks,
there are ways; I can’t forget it, if I live a hundred years."
"Why so? I don’t understand. e whole point is whether you love him
now or not," said Varenka, who called everything by its name.
"I hate him; I can’t forgive myself."
"Why, what for?"
"e shame, the humiliation!"
"Oh! if everyone were as sensitive as you are!" said Varenka. "ere isn’t a
girl who hasn’t been through the same. And it’s all so unimportant."
"Why, what is important?" said Kiy, looking into her face with inquisitive
wonder.
"Oh, there’s so much that’s important," said Varenka, smiling.
"Why, what?"
"Oh, so much that’s more important," answered Varenka, not knowing what
to say. But at that instant they heard the princess’s voice from the window. "Kiy,
it’s cold! Either get a shawl, or come indoors."
"It really is time to go in!" said Varenka, geing up. "I have to go on to
Madame Berthe’s; she asked me to."
Kiy held her by the hand, and with passionate curiosity and entreaty her
eyes asked her: "What is it, what is this of such importance that gives you such
tranquillity? You know, tell me!" But Varenka did not even know what Kiy’s eyes
were asking her. She merely thought that she had to go to see Madame Berthe too
that evening, and to make haste home in time for maman’s tea at twelve o’clock.
She went indoors, collected her music, and saying good-bye to everyone, was
about to go.
"Allow me to see you home," said the colonel.
"Yes, how can you go alone at night like this?" chimed in the princess. "Anyway, I’ll send Parasha."
Kiy saw that Varenka could hardly restrain a smile at the idea that she

cciii
needed an escort.
"No, I always go about alone and nothing ever happens to me," she said,
taking her hat. And kissing Kiy once more, without saying what was important,
she stepped out courageously with the music under her arm and vanished into
the twilight of the summer night, bearing away with her her secret of what was
important and what gave her the calm and dignity so much to be envied.

Chapter 
Kiy made the acquaintance of Madame Stahl too, and this acquaintance, together
with her friendship with Varenka, did not merely exercise a great inﬂuence on
her, it also comforted her in her mental distress. She found this comfort through
a completely new world being opened to her by means of this acquaintance, a
world having nothing in common with her past, an exalted, noble world, from
the height of which she could contemplate her past calmly. It was revealed to
her that besides the instinctive life to which Kiy had given herself up hitherto
there was a spiritual life. is life was disclosed in religion, but a religion having
nothing in common with that one which Kiy had known from childhood, and
which found expression in litanies and all-night services at the Widow’s Home,
where one might meet one’s friends, and in learning by heart Slavonic texts with
the priest. is was a loy, mysterious religion connected with a whole series
of noble thoughts and feelings, which one could do more than merely believe
because one was told to, which one could love.
Kiy found all this out not from words. Madame Stahl talked to Kiy as to a
charming child that one looks on with pleasure as on the memory of one’s youth,
and only once she said in passing that in all human sorrows nothing gives comfort
but love and faith, and that in the sight of Christ’s compassion for us no sorrow is
triﬂing—and immediately talked of other things. But in every gesture of Madame
Stahl, in every word, in every heavenly—as Kiy called it—look, and above all in
the whole story of her life, which she heard from Varenka, Kiy recognized that
something "that was important," of which, till then, she had known nothing.
Yet, elevated as Madame Stahl’s character was, touching as was her story,
and exalted and moving as was her speech, Kiy could not help detecting in her
some traits which perplexed her. She noticed that when questioning her about
her family, Madame Stahl had smiled contemptuously, which was not in accord
with Christian meekness. She noticed, too, that when she had found a Catholic
priest with her, Madame Stahl had studiously kept her face in the shadow of the
lamp-shade and had smiled in a peculiar way. Trivial as these two observations
were, they perplexed her, and she had her doubts as to Madame Stahl. But on

cciv
the other hand Varenka, alone in the world, without friends or relations, with a
melancholy disappointment in the past, desiring nothing, regreing nothing, was
just that perfection of which Kiy dared hardly dream. In Varenka she realized
that one has but to forget oneself and love others, and one will be calm, happy,
and noble. And that was what Kiy longed to be. Seeing now clearly what was
the most important, Kiy was not satisﬁed with being enthusiastic over it; she at
once gave herself up with her whole soul to the new life that was opening to her.
From Varenka’s accounts of the doings of Madame Stahl and other people whom
she mentioned, Kiy had already constructed the plan of her own future life. She
would, like Madame Stahl’s niece, Aline, of whom Varenka had talked to her a
great deal, seek out those who were in trouble, wherever she might be living,
help them as far as she could, give them the Gospel, read the Gospel to the sick,
to criminals, to the dying. e idea of reading the Gospel to criminals, as Aline
did, particularly fascinated Kiy. But all these were secret dreams, of which Kiy
did not talk either to her mother or to Varenka.
While awaiting the time for carrying out her plans on a large scale, however,
Kiy, even then at the springs, where there were so many people ill and unhappy,
readily found a chance for practicing her new principles in imitation of Varenka.
At ﬁrst the princess noticed nothing but that Kiy was much under the
inﬂuence of her engouement, as she called it, for Madame Stahl, and still more for
Varenka. She saw that Kiy did not merely imitate Varenka in her conduct, but
unconsciously imitated her in her manner of walking, of talking, of blinking her
eyes. But later on the princess noticed that, apart from this adoration, some kind
of serious spiritual change was taking place in her daughter.
e princess saw that in the evenings Kiy read a French testament that
Madame Stahl had given her—a thing she had never done before; that she
avoided society acquaintances and associated with the sick people who were under Varenka’s protection, and especially one poor family, that of a sick painter,
Petrov. Kiy was unmistakably proud of playing the part of a sister of mercy in
that family. All this was well enough, and the princess had nothing to say against
it, especially as Petrov’s wife was a perfectly nice sort of woman, and that the
German princess, noticing Kiy’s devotion, praised her, calling her an angel of
consolation. All this would have been very well, if there had been no exaggeration. But the princess saw that her daughter was rushing into extremes, and so
indeed she told her.
"Il ne faut jamais rien outrer," she said to her.
Her daughter made her no reply, only in her heart she thought that one
could not talk about exaggeration where Christianity was concerned. What exaggeration could there be in the practice of a doctrine wherein one was bidden
to turn the other cheek when one was smien, and give one’s cloak if one’s coat

ccv
were taken? But the princess disliked this exaggeration, and disliked even more
the fact that she felt her daughter did not care to show her all her heart. Kiy did
in fact conceal her new views and feelings from her mother. She concealed them
not because she did not respect or did not love her mother, but simply because
she was her mother. She would have revealed them to anyone sooner than to her
mother.
"How is it Anna Pavlovna’s not been to see us for so long?" the princess
said one day of Madame Petrova. "I’ve asked her, but she seems put out about
something."
"No, I’ve not noticed it, maman," said Kiy, ﬂushing hotly.
"Is it long since you went to see them?"
"We’re meaning to make an expedition to the mountains tomorrow," answered Kiy.
"Well, you can go," answered the princess, gazing at her daughter’s embarrassed face and trying to guess the cause of her embarrassment.
at day Varenka came to dinner and told them that Anna Pavlovna had
changed her mind and given up the expedition for the morrow. And the princess
noticed again that Kiy reddened.
"Kiy, haven’t you had some misunderstanding with the Petrovs?" said the
princess, when they were le alone. "Why has she given up sending the children
and coming to see us?"
Kiy answered that nothing had happened between them, and that she
could not tell why Anna Pavlovna seemed displeased with her. Kiy answered
perfectly truly. She did not know the reason Anna Pavlovna had changed to her,
but she guessed it. She guessed at something which she could not tell her mother,
which she did not put into words to herself. It was one of those things which one
knows but which one can never speak of even to oneself, so terrible and shameful
would it be to be mistaken.
Again and again she went over in her memory all her relations with the family. She remembered the simple delight expressed on the round, good-humored
face of Anna Pavlovna at their meetings; she remembered their secret confabulations about the invalid, their plots to draw him away from the work which was
forbidden him, and to get him out-of-doors; the devotion of the youngest boy,
who used to call her "my Kiy," and would not go to bed without her. How nice
it all was! en she recalled the thin, terribly thin ﬁgure of Petrov, with his long
neck, in his brown coat, his scant, curly hair, his questioning blue eyes that were
so terrible to Kiy at ﬁrst, and his painful aempts to seem hearty and lively in
her presence. She recalled the eﬀorts she had made at ﬁrst to overcome the repugnance she felt for him, as for all consumptive people, and the pains it had cost her
to think of things to say to him. She recalled the timid, soened look with which

ccvi
he gazed at her, and the strange feeling of compassion and awkwardness, and later
of a sense of her own goodness, which she had felt at it. How nice it all was! But
all that was at ﬁrst. Now, a few days ago, everything was suddenly spoiled. Anna
Pavlovna had met Kiy with aﬀected cordiality, and had kept continual watch on
her and on her husband.
Could that touching pleasure he showed when she came near be the cause
of Anna Pavlovna’s coolness?
"Yes," she mused, "there was something unnatural about Anna Pavlovna, and
uerly unlike her good nature, when she said angrily the day before yesterday:
‘ere, he will keep waiting for you; he wouldn’t drink his coﬀee without you,
though he’s grown so dreadfully weak.’"
"Yes, perhaps, too, she didn’t like it when I gave him the rug. It was all
so simple, but he took it so awkwardly, and was so long thanking me, that I felt
awkward too. And then that portrait of me he did so well. And most of all that
look of confusion and tenderness! Yes, yes, that’s it!" Kiy repeated to herself
with horror. "No, it can’t be, it oughtn’t to be! He’s so much to be pitied!" she
said to herself directly aer.
is doubt poisoned the charm of her new life.

Chapter 
Before the end of the course of drinking the waters, Prince Shtcherbatsky, who
had gone on from Carlsbad to Baden and Kissingen to Russian friends—to get a
breath of Russian air, as he said—came back to his wife and daughter.
e views of the prince and of the princess on life abroad were completely
opposed. e princess thought everything delightful, and in spite of her established position in Russian society, she tried abroad to be like a European fashionable lady, which she was not—for the simple reason that she was a typical
Russian gentlewoman; and so she was aﬀected, which did not altogether suit her.
e prince, on the contrary, thought everything foreign detestable, got sick of European life, kept to his Russian habits, and purposely tried to show himself abroad
less European than he was in reality.
e prince returned thinner, with the skin hanging in loose bags on his
cheeks, but in the most cheerful frame of mind. His good humor was even greater
when he saw Kiy completely recovered. e news of Kiy’s friendship with
Madame Stahl and Varenka, and the reports the princess gave him of some kind
of change she had noticed in Kiy, troubled the prince and aroused his habitual
feeling of jealousy of everything that drew his daughter away from him, and a
dread that his daughter might have got out of the reach of his inﬂuence into re-

ccvii
gions inaccessible to him. But these unpleasant maers were all drowned in the
sea of kindliness and good humor which was always within him, and more so
than ever since his course of Carlsbad waters.
e day aer his arrival the prince, in his long overcoat, with his Russian
wrinkles and baggy cheeks propped up by a starched collar, set oﬀ with his daughter to the spring in the greatest good humor.
It was a lovely morning: the bright, cheerful houses with their lile gardens,
the sight of the red-faced, red-armed, beer-drinking German waitresses, working
away merrily, did the heart good. But the nearer they got to the springs the oftener they met sick people; and their appearance seemed more pitiable than ever
among the everyday conditions of prosperous German life. Kiy was no longer
struck by this contrast. e bright sun, the brilliant green of the foliage, the strains
of the music were for her the natural seing of all these familiar faces, with their
changes to greater emaciation or to convalescence, for which she watched. But
to the prince the brightness and gaiety of the June morning, and the sound of the
orchestra playing a gay waltz then in fashion, and above all, the appearance of
the healthy aendants, seemed something unseemly and monstrous, in conjunction with these slowly moving, dying ﬁgures gathered together from all parts of
Europe. In spite of his feeling of pride and, as it were, of the return of youth, with
his favorite daughter on his arm, he felt awkward, and almost ashamed of his vigorous step and his sturdy, stout limbs. He felt almost like a man not dressed in a
crowd.
"Present me to your new friends," he said to his daughter, squeezing her
hand with his elbow. "I like even your horrid Soden for making you so well again.
Only it’s melancholy, very melancholy here. Who’s that?"
Kiy mentioned the names of all the people they met, with some of whom
she was acquainted and some not. At the entrance of the garden they met the blind
lady, Madame Berthe, with her guide, and the prince was delighted to see the old
Frenchwoman’s face light up when she heard Kiy’s voice. She at once began
talking to him with French exaggerated politeness, applauding him for having
such a delightful daughter, extolling Kiy to the skies before her face, and calling
her a treasure, a pearl, and a consoling angel.
"Well, she’s the second angel, then," said the prince, smiling. "she calls
Mademoiselle Varenka angel number one."
"Oh! Mademoiselle Varenka, she’s a real angel, allez," Madame Berthe assented.
In the arcade they met Varenka herself. She was walking rapidly towards
them carrying an elegant red bag.
"Here is papa come," Kiy said to her.
Varenka made—simply and naturally as she did everything—a movement

ccviii
between a bow and a curtsey, and immediately began talking to the prince, without shyness, naturally, as she talked to everyone.
"Of course I know you; I know you very well," the prince said to her with a
smile, in which Kiy detected with joy that her father liked her friend. "Where
are you oﬀ to in such haste?"
"Maman’s here," she said, turning to Kiy. "She has not slept all night, and
the doctor advised her to go out. I’m taking her her work."
"So that’s angel number one?" said the prince when Varenka had gone on.
Kiy saw that her father had meant to make fun of Varenka, but that he
could not do it because he liked her.
"Come, so we shall see all your friends," he went on, "even Madame Stahl, if
she deigns to recognize me."
"Why, did you know her, papa?" Kiy asked apprehensively, catching the
gleam of irony that kindled in the prince’s eyes at the mention of Madame Stahl.
"I used to know her husband, and her too a lile, before she’d joined the
Pietists."
"What is a Pietist, papa?" asked Kiy, dismayed to ﬁnd that what she prized
so highly in Madame Stahl had a name.
"I don’t quite know myself. I only know that she thanks God for everything,
for every misfortune, and thanks God too that her husband died. And that’s rather
droll, as they didn’t get on together."
"Who’s that? What a piteous face!" he asked, noticing a sick man of medium
height siing on a bench, wearing a brown overcoat and white trousers that fell in
strange folds about his long, ﬂeshless legs. is man lied his straw hat, showed
his scanty curly hair and high forehead, painfully reddened by the pressure of the
hat.
"at’s Petrov, an artist," answered Kiy, blushing. "And that’s his wife," she
added, indicating Anna Pavlovna, who, as though on purpose, at the very instant
they approached walked away aer a child that had run oﬀ along a path.
"Poor fellow! and what a nice face he has!" said the prince. "Why don’t you
go up to him? He wanted to speak to you."
"Well, let us go, then," said Kiy, turning round resolutely. "How are you
feeling today?" she asked Petrov.
Petrov got up, leaning on his stick, and looked shyly at the prince.
"is is my daughter," said the prince. "Let me introduce myself."
e painter bowed and smiled, showing his strangely dazzling white teeth.
"We expected you yesterday, princess," he said to Kiy. He staggered as he
said this, and then repeated the motion, trying to make it seem as if it had been
intentional.
"I meant to come, but Varenka said that Anna Pavlovna sent word you were

ccix
not going."
"Not going!" said Petrov, blushing, and immediately beginning to cough,
and his eyes sought his wife. "Anita! Anita!" he said loudly, and the swollen veins
stood out like cords on his thin white neck.
Anna Pavlovna came up.
"So you sent word to the princess that we weren’t going!" he whispered to
her angrily, losing his voice.
"Good morning, princess," said Anna Pavlovna, with an assumed smile utterly unlike her former manner. "Very glad to make your acquaintance," she said
to the prince. "You’ve long been expected, prince."
"What did you send word to the princess that we weren’t going for?" the
artist whispered hoarsely once more, still more angrily, obviously exasperated
that his voice failed him so that he could not give his words the expression he
would have liked to.
"Oh, mercy on us! I thought we weren’t going," his wife answered crossly.
"What, when…." He coughed and waved his hand. e prince took oﬀ his
hat and moved away with his daughter.
"Ah! ah!" he sighed deeply. "Oh, poor things!"
"Yes, papa," answered Kiy. "And you must know they’ve three children, no
servant, and scarcely any means. He gets something from the Academy," she went
on briskly, trying to drown the distress that the queer change in Anna Pavlovna’s
manner to her had aroused in her.
"Oh, here’s Madame Stahl," said Kiy, indicating an invalid carriage, where,
propped on pillows, something in gray and blue was lying under a sunshade. is
was Madame Stahl. Behind her stood the gloomy, healthy-looking German workman who pushed the carriage. Close by was standing a ﬂaxen-headed Swedish
count, whom Kiy knew by name. Several invalids were lingering near the low
carriage, staring at the lady as though she were some curiosity.
e prince went up to her, and Kiy detected that disconcerting gleam of
irony in his eyes. He went up to Madame Stahl, and addressed her with extreme
courtesy and aﬀability in that excellent French that so few speak nowadays.
"I don’t know if you remember me, but I must recall myself to thank you
for your kindness to my daughter," he said, taking oﬀ his hat and not puing it on
again.
"Prince Alexander Shtcherbatsky," said Madame Stahl, liing upon him her
heavenly eyes, in which Kiy discerned a look of annoyance. "Delighted! I have
taken a great fancy to your daughter."
"You are still in weak health?"
"Yes; I’m used to it," said Madame Stahl, and she introduced the prince to
the Swedish count.

ccx
"You are scarcely changed at all," the prince said to her. "It’s ten or eleven
years since I had the honor of seeing you."
"Yes; God sends the cross and sends the strength to bear it. Oen one wonders what is the goal of this life?… e other side!" she said angrily to Varenka,
who had rearranged the rug over her feet not to her satisfaction.
"To do good, probably," said the prince with a twinkle in his eye.
"at is not for us to judge," said Madame Stahl, perceiving the shade of
expression on the prince’s face. "So you will send me that book, dear count? I’m
very grateful to you," she said to the young Swede.
"Ah!" cried the prince, catching sight of the Moscow colonel standing near,
and with a bow to Madame Stahl he walked away with his daughter and the
Moscow colonel, who joined them.
"at’s our aristocracy, prince!" the Moscow colonel said with ironical intention. He cherished a grudge against Madame Stahl for not making his acquaintance.
"She’s just the same," replied the prince.
"Did you know her before her illness, prince—that’s to say before she took
to her bed?"
"Yes. She took to her bed before my eyes," said the prince.
"ey say it’s ten years since she has stood on her feet."
"She doesn’t stand up because her legs are too short. She’s a very bad ﬁgure."
"Papa, it’s not possible!" cried Kiy.
"at’s what wicked tongues say, my darling. And your Varenka catches it
too," he added. "Oh, these invalid ladies!"
"Oh, no, papa!" Kiy objected warmly. "Varenka worships her. And then
she does so much good! Ask anyone! Everyone knows her and Aline Stahl."
"Perhaps so," said the prince, squeezing her hand with his elbow; "but it’s
beer when one does good so that you may ask everyone and no one knows."
Kiy did not answer, not because she had nothing to say, but because she
did not care to reveal her secret thoughts even to her father. But, strange to
say, although she had so made up her mind not to be inﬂuenced by her father’s
views, not to let him into her inmost sanctuary, she felt that the heavenly image
of Madame Stahl, which she had carried for a whole month in her heart, had vanished, never to return, just as the fantastic ﬁgure made up of some clothes thrown
down at random vanishes when one sees that it is only some garment lying there.
All that was le was a woman with short legs, who lay down because she had a
bad ﬁgure, and worried patient Varenka for not arranging her rug to her liking.
And by no eﬀort of the imagination could Kiy bring back the former Madame
Stahl.

ccxi

Chapter 
e prince communicated his good humor to his own family and his friends, and
even to the German landlord in whose rooms the Shtcherbatskys were staying.
On coming back with Kiy from the springs, the prince, who had asked the
colonel, and Marya Yevgenyevna, and Varenka all to come and have coﬀee with
them, gave orders for a table and chairs to be taken into the garden under the
chestnut tree, and lunch to be laid there. e landlord and the servants, too, grew
brisker under the inﬂuence of his good spirits. ey knew his open-handedness;
and half an hour later the invalid doctor from Hamburg, who lived on the top
ﬂoor, looked enviously out of the window at the merry party of healthy Russians
assembled under the chestnut tree. In the trembling circles of shadow cast by the
leaves, at a table, covered with a white cloth, and set with coﬀeepot, bread-andbuer, cheese, and cold game, sat the princess in a high cap with lilac ribbons,
distributing cups and bread-and-buer. At the other end sat the prince, eating
heartily, and talking loudly and merrily. e prince had spread out near him his
purchases, carved boxes, and knick-knacks, paper-knives of all sorts, of which
he bought a heap at every watering-place, and bestowed them upon everyone,
including Lieschen, the servant girl, and the landlord, with whom he jested in his
comically bad German, assuring him that it was not the water had cured Kiy,
but his splendid cookery, especially his plum soup. e princess laughed at her
husband for his Russian ways, but she was more lively and good-humored than
she had been all the while she had been at the waters. e colonel smiled, as he
always did, at the prince’s jokes, but as far as regards Europe, of which he believed
himself to be making a careful study, he took the princess’s side. e simplehearted Marya Yevgenyevna simply roared with laughter at everything absurd
the prince said, and his jokes made Varenka helpless with feeble but infectious
laughter, which was something Kiy had never seen before.
Kiy was glad of all this, but she could not be light-hearted. She could not
solve the problem her father had unconsciously set her by his goodhumored view
of her friends, and of the life that had so aracted her. To this doubt there was
joined the change in her relations with the Petrovs, which had been so conspicuously and unpleasantly marked that morning. Everyone was good humored, but
Kiy could not feel good humored, and this increased her distress. She felt a feeling such as she had known in childhood, when she had been shut in her room as
a punishment, and had heard her sisters’ merry laughter outside.
"Well, but what did you buy this mass of things for?" said the princess,
smiling, and handing her husband a cup of coﬀee.
"One goes for a walk, one looks in a shop, and they ask you to buy. ‘Erlaut,
Durlaut?’ Directly they say ‘Durlaut,’ I can’t hold out. I lose ten thalers."

ccxii
"It’s simply from boredom," said the princess.
"Of course it is. Such boredom, my dear, that one doesn’t know what to do
with oneself."
"How can you be bored, prince? ere’s so much that’s interesting now in
Germany," said Marya Yevgenyevna.
"But I know everything that’s interesting: the plum soup I know, and the
pea sausages I know. I know everything."
"No, you may say what you like, prince, there’s the interest of their institutions," said the colonel.
"But what is there interesting about it? ey’re all as pleased as brass halfpence. ey’ve conquered everybody, and why am I to be pleased at that? I
haven’t conquered anyone; and I’m obliged to take oﬀ my own boots, yes, and
put them away too; in the morning, get up and dress at once, and go to the dining
room to drink bad tea! How diﬀerent it is at home! You get up in no haste, you get
cross, grumble a lile, and come round again. You’ve time to think things over,
and no hurry."
"But time’s money, you forget that," said the colonel.
"Time, indeed, that depends! Why, there’s time one would give a month of
for sixpence, and time you wouldn’t give half an hour of for any money. Isn’t that
so, Katinka? What is it? why are you so depressed?"
"I’m not depressed."
"Where are you oﬀ to? Stay a lile longer," he said to Varenka.
"I must be going home," said Varenka, geing up, and again she went oﬀ into
a giggle. When she had recovered, she said good-bye, and went into the house to
get her hat.
Kiy followed her. Even Varenka struck her as diﬀerent. She was not worse,
but diﬀerent from what she had fancied her before.
"Oh, dear! it’s a long while since I’ve laughed so much!" said Varenka, gathering up her parasol and her bag. "How nice he is, your father!"
Kiy did not speak.
"When shall I see you again?" asked Varenka.
"Mamma meant to go and see the Petrovs. Won’t you be there?" said Kiy,
to try Varenka.
"Yes," answered Varenka. "ey’re geing ready to go away, so I promised
to help them pack."
"Well, I’ll come too, then."
"No, why should you?"
"Why not? why not? why not?" said Kiy, opening her eyes wide, and
clutching at Varenka’s parasol, so as not to let her go. "No, wait a minute; why
not?"

ccxiii
"Oh, nothing; your father has come, and besides, they will feel awkward at
your helping."
"No, tell me why you don’t want me to be oen at the Petrovs’. You don’t
want me to—why not?"
"I didn’t say that," said Varenka quietly.
"No, please tell me!"
"Tell you everything?" asked Varenka.
"Everything, everything!" Kiy assented.
"Well, there’s really nothing of any consequence; only that Mihail Alexeyevitch" (that was the artist’s name) "had meant to leave earlier, and now he doesn’t
want to go away," said Varenka, smiling.
"Well, well!" Kiy urged impatiently, looking darkly at Varenka.
"Well, and for some reason Anna Pavlovna told him that he didn’t want to
go because you are here. Of course, that was nonsense; but there was a dispute
over it—over you. You know how irritable these sick people are."
Kiy, scowling more than ever, kept silent, and Varenka went on speaking
alone, trying to soen or soothe her, and seeing a storm coming—she did not know
whether of tears or of words.
"So you’d beer not go…. You understand; you won’t be oﬀended?…"
"And it serves me right! And it serves me right!" Kiy cried quickly, snatching the parasol out of Varenka’s hand, and looking past her friend’s face.
Varenka felt inclined to smile, looking at her childish fury, but she was afraid
of wounding her.
"How does it serve you right? I don’t understand," she said.
"It serves me right, because it was all sham; because it was all done on
purpose, and not from the heart. What business had I to interfere with outsiders?
And so it’s come about that I’m a cause of quarrel, and that I’ve done what nobody
asked me to do. Because it was all a sham! a sham! a sham!…"
"A sham! with what object?" said Varenka gently.
"Oh, it’s so idiotic! so hateful! ere was no need whatever for me…. Nothing but sham!" she said, opening and shuing the parasol.
"But with what object?"
"To seem beer to people, to myself, to God; to deceive everyone. No! now
I won’t descend to that. I’ll be bad; but anyway not a liar, a cheat."
"But who is a cheat?" said Varenka reproachfully. "You speak as if…"
But Kiy was in one of her gusts of fury, and she would not let her ﬁnish.
"I don’t talk about you, not about you at all. You’re perfection. Yes, yes, I
know you’re all perfection; but what am I to do if I’m bad? is would never have
been if I weren’t bad. So let me be what I am. I won’t be a sham. What have I
to do with Anna Pavlovna? Let them go their way, and me go mine. I can’t be

ccxiv
diﬀerent…. And yet it’s not that, it’s not that."
"What is not that?" asked Varenka in bewilderment.
"Everything. I can’t act except from the heart, and you act from principle. I
liked you simply, but you most likely only wanted to save me, to improve me."
"You are unjust," said Varenka.
"But I’m not speaking of other people, I’m speaking of myself."
"Kiy," they heard her mother’s voice, "come here, show papa your necklace."
Kiy, with a haughty air, without making peace with her friend, took the
necklace in a lile box from the table and went to her mother.
"What’s the maer? Why are you so red?" her mother and father said to
her with one voice.
"Nothing," she answered. "I’ll be back directly," and she ran back.
"She’s still here," she thought. "What am I to say to her? Oh, dear! what
have I done, what have I said? Why was I rude to her? What am I to do? What
am I to say to her?" thought Kiy, and she stopped in the doorway.
Varenka in her hat and with the parasol in her hands was siing at the table
examining the spring which Kiy had broken. She lied her head.
"Varenka, forgive me, do forgive me," whispered Kiy, going up to her. "I
don’t remember what I said. I…"
"I really didn’t mean to hurt you," said Varenka, smiling.
Peace was made. But with her father’s coming all the world in which she
had been living was transformed for Kiy. She did not give up everything she
had learned, but she became aware that she had deceived herself in supposing
she could be what she wanted to be. Her eyes were, it seemed, opened; she felt
all the diﬃculty of maintaining herself without hypocrisy and self-conceit on the
pinnacle to which she had wished to mount. Moreover, she became aware of all
the dreariness of the world of sorrow, of sick and dying people, in which she had
been living. e eﬀorts she had made to like it seemed to her intolerable, and she
felt a longing to get back quickly into the fresh air, to Russia, to Ergushovo, where,
as she knew from leers, her sister Dolly had already gone with her children.
But her aﬀection for Varenka did not wane. As she said good-bye, Kiy
begged her to come to them in Russia.
"I’ll come when you get married," said Varenka.
"I shall never marry."
"Well, then, I shall never come."
"Well, then, I shall be married simply for that. Mind now, remember your
promise," said Kiy.
e doctor’s prediction was fulﬁlled. Kiy returned home to Russia cured.
She was not so gay and thoughtless as before, but she was serene. Her Moscow

troubles had become a memory to her.

PART THREE
Chapter 
Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev wanted a rest from mental work, and instead of going abroad as he usually did, he came towards the end of May to stay in the country with his brother. In his judgment the best sort of life was a country life. He
had come now to enjoy such a life at his brother’s. Konstantin Levin was very glad
to have him, especially as he did not expect his brother Nikolay that summer. But
in spite of his aﬀection and respect for Sergey Ivanovitch, Konstantin Levin was
uncomfortable with his brother in the country. It made him uncomfortable, and it
positively annoyed him to see his brother’s aitude to the country. To Konstantin
Levin the country was the background of life, that is of pleasures, endeavors, labor. To Sergey Ivanovitch the country meant on one hand rest from work, on the
other a valuable antidote to the corrupt inﬂuences of town, which he took with
satisfaction and a sense of its utility. To Konstantin Levin the country was good
ﬁrst because it aﬀorded a ﬁeld for labor, of the usefulness of which there could
be no doubt. To Sergey Ivanovitch the country was particularly good, because
there it was possible and ﬁing to do nothing. Moreover, Sergey Ivanovitch’s
aitude to the peasants rather piqued Konstantin. Sergey Ivanovitch used to say
that he knew and liked the peasantry, and he oen talked to the peasants, which
he knew how to do without aﬀectation or condescension, and from every such
conversation he would deduce general conclusions in favor of the peasantry and
in conﬁrmation of his knowing them. Konstantin Levin did not like such an aitude to the peasants. To Konstantin the peasant was simply the chief partner in
their common labor, and in spite of all the respect and the love, almost like that of
kinship, he had for the peasant—sucked in probably, as he said himself, with the
milk of his peasant nurse—still as a fellow-worker with him, while sometimes enthusiastic over the vigor, gentleness, and justice of these men, he was very oen,
when their common labors called for other qualities, exasperated with the peas-

ccxvi
ant for his carelessness, lack of method, drunkenness, and lying. If he had been
asked whether he liked or didn’t like the peasants, Konstantin Levin would have
been absolutely at a loss what to reply. He liked and did not like the peasants, just
as he liked and did not like men in general. Of course, being a good-hearted man,
he liked men rather than he disliked them, and so too with the peasants. But like
or dislike "the people" as something apart he could not, not only because he lived
with "the people," and all his interests were bound up with theirs, but also because
he regarded himself as a part of "the people," did not see any special qualities or
failings distinguishing himself and "the people," and could not contrast himself
with them. Moreover, although he had lived so long in the closest relations with
the peasants, as farmer and arbitrator, and what was more, as adviser (the peasants trusted him, and for thirty miles round they would come to ask his advice),
he had no deﬁnite views of "the people," and would have been as much at a loss
to answer the question whether he knew "the people" as the question whether he
liked them. For him to say he knew the peasantry would have been the same as
to say he knew men. He was continually watching and geing to know people of
all sorts, and among them peasants, whom he regarded as good and interesting
people, and he was continually observing new points in them, altering his former views of them and forming new ones. With Sergey Ivanovitch it was quite
the contrary. Just as he liked and praised a country life in comparison with the
life he did not like, so too he liked the peasantry in contradistinction to the class
of men he did not like, and so too he knew the peasantry as something distinct
from and opposed to men generally. In his methodical brain there were distinctly
formulated certain aspects of peasant life, deduced partly from that life itself, but
chieﬂy from contrast with other modes of life. He never changed his opinion of
the peasantry and his sympathetic aitude towards them.
In the discussions that arose between the brothers on their views of the
peasantry, Sergey Ivanovitch always got the beer of his brother, precisely because Sergey Ivanovitch had deﬁnite ideas about the peasant—his character, his
qualities, and his tastes. Konstantin Levin had no deﬁnite and unalterable idea
on the subject, and so in their arguments Konstantin was readily convicted of
contradicting himself.
In Sergey Ivanovitch’s eyes his younger brother was a capital fellow, with
his heart in the right place (as he expressed it in French), but with a mind which,
though fairly quick, was too much inﬂuenced by the impressions of the moment,
and consequently ﬁlled with contradictions. With all the condescension of an
elder brother he sometimes explained to him the true import of things, but he
derived lile satisfaction from arguing with him because he got the beer of him
too easily.
Konstantin Levin regarded his brother as a man of immense intellect and

ccxvii
culture, as generous in the highest sense of the word, and possessed of a special
faculty for working for the public good. But in the depths of his heart, the older
he became, and the more intimately he knew his brother, the more and more
frequently the thought struck him that this faculty of working for the public good,
of which he felt himself uerly devoid, was possibly not so much a quality as a
lack of something—not a lack of good, honest, noble desires and tastes, but a lack
of vital force, of what is called heart, of that impulse which drives a man to choose
someone out of the innumerable paths of life, and to care only for that one. e
beer he knew his brother, the more he noticed that Sergey Ivanovitch, and many
other people who worked for the public welfare, were not led by an impulse of
the heart to care for the public good, but reasoned from intellectual considerations
that it was a right thing to take interest in public aﬀairs, and consequently took
interest in them. Levin was conﬁrmed in this generalization by observing that
his brother did not take questions aﬀecting the public welfare or the question of
the immortality of the soul a bit more to heart than he did chess problems, or the
ingenious construction of a new machine.
Besides this, Konstantin Levin was not at his ease with his brother, because
in summer in the country Levin was continually busy with work on the land, and
the long summer day was not long enough for him to get through all he had to do,
while Sergey Ivanovitch was taking a holiday. But though he was taking a holiday
now, that is to say, he was doing no writing, he was so used to intellectual activity
that he liked to put into concise and eloquent shape the ideas that occurred to him,
and liked to have someone to listen to him. His most usual and natural listener was
his brother. And so in spite of the friendliness and directness of their relations,
Konstantin felt an awkwardness in leaving him alone. Sergey Ivanovitch liked to
stretch himself on the grass in the sun, and to lie so, basking and chaing lazily.
"You wouldn’t believe," he would say to his brother, "what a pleasure this
rural laziness is to me. Not an idea in one’s brain, as empty as a drum!"
But Konstantin Levin found it dull siing and listening to him, especially
when he knew that while he was away they would be carting dung onto the ﬁelds
not ploughed ready for it, and heaping it all up anyhow; and would not screw
the shares in the ploughs, but would let them come oﬀ and then say that the new
ploughs were a silly invention, and there was nothing like the old Andreevna
plough, and so on.
"Come, you’ve done enough trudging about in the heat," Sergey Ivanovitch
would say to him.
"No, I must just run round to the counting-house for a minute," Levin would
answer, and he would run oﬀ to the ﬁelds.

ccxviii

Chapter 
Early in June it happened that Agafea Mihalovna, the old nurse and housekeeper,
in carrying to the cellar a jar of mushrooms she had just pickled, slipped, fell, and
sprained her wrist. e district doctor, a talkative young medical student, who had
just ﬁnished his studies, came to see her. He examined the wrist, said it was not
broken, was delighted at a chance of talking to the celebrated Sergey Ivanovitch
Koznishev, and to show his advanced views of things told him all the scandal
of the district, complaining of the poor state into which the district council had
fallen. Sergey Ivanovitch listened aentively, asked him questions, and, roused by
a new listener, he talked ﬂuently, uered a few keen and weighty observations,
respectfully appreciated by the young doctor, and was soon in that eager frame
of mind his brother knew so well, which always, with him, followed a brilliant
and eager conversation. Aer the departure of the doctor, he wanted to go with
a ﬁshing rod to the river. Sergey Ivanovitch was fond of angling, and was, it
seemed, proud of being able to care for such a stupid occupation.
Konstantin Levin, whose presence was needed in the plough land and meadows, had come to take his brother in the trap.
It was that time of the year, the turning-point of summer, when the crops
of the present year are a certainty, when one begins to think of the sowing for
next year, and the mowing is at hand; when the rye is all in ear, though its ears
are still light, not yet full, and it waves in gray-green billows in the wind; when
the green oats, with tus of yellow grass scaered here and there among it, droop
irregularly over the late-sown ﬁelds; when the early buckwheat is already out and
hiding the ground; when the fallow lands, trodden hard as stone by the cale, are
half ploughed over, with paths le untouched by the plough; when from the dry
dung-heaps carted onto the ﬁelds there comes at sunset a smell of manure mixed
with meadow-sweet, and on the low-lying lands the riverside meadows are a thick
sea of grass waiting for the mowing, with blackened heaps of the stalks of sorrel
among it.
It was the time when there comes a brief pause in the toil of the ﬁelds before
the beginning of the labors of harvest—every year recurring, every year straining
every nerve of the peasants. e crop was a splendid one, and bright, hot summer
days had set in with short, dewy nights.
e brothers had to drive through the woods to reach the meadows. Sergey
Ivanovitch was all the while admiring the beauty of the woods, which were a tangled mass of leaves, pointing out to his brother now an old lime tree on the point
of ﬂowering, dark on the shady side, and brightly spoed with yellow stipules,
now the young shoots of this year’s saplings brilliant with emerald. Konstantin
Levin did not like talking and hearing about the beauty of nature. Words for him

ccxix
took away the beauty of what he saw. He assented to what his brother said, but
he could not help beginning to think of other things. When they came out of the
woods, all his aention was engrossed by the view of the fallow land on the upland, in parts yellow with grass, in parts trampled and checkered with furrows,
in parts doed with ridges of dung, and in parts even ploughed. A string of carts
was moving across it. Levin counted the carts, and was pleased that all that were
wanted had been brought, and at the sight of the meadows his thoughts passed
to the mowing. He always felt something special moving him to the quick at the
hay-making. On reaching the meadow Levin stopped the horse.
e morning dew was still lying on the thick undergrowth of the grass, and
that he might not get his feet wet, Sergey Ivanovitch asked his brother to drive
him in the trap up to the willow tree from which the carp was caught. Sorry
as Konstantin Levin was to crush down his mowing grass, he drove him into the
meadow. e high grass soly turned about the wheels and the horse’s legs, leaving its seeds clinging to the wet axles and spokes of the wheels. His brother seated
himself under a bush, arranging his tackle, while Levin led the horse away, fastened him up, and walked into the vast gray-green sea of grass unstirred by the
wind. e silky grass with its ripe seeds came almost to his waist in the dampest
spots.
Crossing the meadow, Konstantin Levin came out onto the road, and met
an old man with a swollen eye, carrying a skep on his shoulder.
"What? taken a stray swarm, Fomitch?" he asked.
"No, indeed, Konstantin Dmitrich! All we can do to keep our own! is
is the second swarm that has ﬂown away…. Luckily the lads caught them. ey
were ploughing your ﬁeld. ey unyoked the horses and galloped aer them."
"Well, what do you say, Fomitch—start mowing or wait a bit?"
"Eh, well. Our way’s to wait till St. Peter’s Day. But you always mow
sooner. Well, to be sure, please God, the hay’s good. ere’ll be plenty for the
beasts."
"What do you think about the weather?"
"at’s in God’s hands. Maybe it will be ﬁne."
Levin went up to his brother.
Sergey Ivanovitch had caught nothing, but he was not bored, and seemed in
the most cheerful frame of mind. Levin saw that, stimulated by his conversation
with the doctor, he wanted to talk. Levin, on the other hand, would have liked to
get home as soon as possible to give orders about geing together the mowers for
next day, and to set at rest his doubts about the mowing, which greatly absorbed
him.
"Well, let’s be going," he said.
"Why be in such a hurry? Let’s stay a lile. But how wet you are! Even

ccxx
though one catches nothing, it’s nice. at’s the best thing about every part of
sport, that one has to do with nature. How exquisite this steely water is!" said
Sergey Ivanovitch. "ese riverside banks always remind me of the riddle—do
you know it? ‘e grass says to the water: we quiver and we quiver.’"
"I don’t know the riddle," answered Levin wearily.

Chapter 
"Do you know, I’ve been thinking about you," said Sergey Ivanovitch. "It’s beyond
everything what’s being done in the district, according to what this doctor tells
me. He’s a very intelligent fellow. And as I’ve told you before, I tell you again:
it’s not right for you not to go to the meetings, and altogether to keep out of the
district business. If decent people won’t go into it, of course it’s bound to go all
wrong. We pay the money, and it all goes in salaries, and there are no schools,
nor district nurses, nor midwives, nor drugstores—nothing."
"Well, I did try, you know," Levin said slowly and unwillingly. "I can’t! and
so there’s no help for it."
"But why can’t you? I must own I can’t make it out. Indiﬀerence, incapacity—I won’t admit; surely it’s not simply laziness?"
"None of those things. I’ve tried, and I see I can do nothing," said Levin.
He had hardly grasped what his brother was saying. Looking towards the
plough land across the river, he made out something black, but he could not distinguish whether it was a horse or the bailiﬀ on horseback.
"Why is it you can do nothing? You made an aempt and didn’t succeed, as
you think, and you give in. How can you have so lile self-respect?"
"Self-respect!" said Levin, stung to the quick by his brother’s words; "I don’t
understand. If they’d told me at college that other people understood the integral
calculus, and I didn’t, then pride would have come in. But in this case one wants
ﬁrst to be convinced that one has certain qualiﬁcations for this sort of business,
and especially that all this business is of great importance."
"What! do you mean to say it’s not of importance?" said Sergey Ivanovitch,
stung to the quick too at his brother’s considering anything of no importance that
interested him, and still more at his obviously paying lile aention to what he
was saying.
"I don’t think it important; it does not take hold of me, I can’t help it," answered Levin, making out that what he saw was the bailiﬀ, and that the bailiﬀ
seemed to be leing the peasants go oﬀ the ploughed land. ey were turning
the plough over. "Can they have ﬁnished ploughing?" he wondered.
"Come, really though," said the elder brother, with a frown on his handsome,

ccxxi
clever face, "there’s a limit to everything. It’s very well to be original and genuine,
and to dislike everything conventional—I know all about that; but really, what
you’re saying either has no meaning, or it has a very wrong meaning. How can
you think it a maer of no importance whether the peasant, whom you love as
you assert…"
"I never did assert it," thought Konstantin Levin.
"… dies without help? e ignorant peasant-women starve the children,
and the people stagnate in darkness, and are helpless in the hands of every village
clerk, while you have at your disposal a means of helping them, and don’t help
them because to your mind it’s of no importance."
And Sergey Ivanovitch put before him the alternative: either you are so
undeveloped that you can’t see all that you can do, or you won’t sacriﬁce your
ease, your vanity, or whatever it is, to do it.
Konstantin Levin felt that there was no course open to him but to submit,
or to confess to a lack of zeal for the public good. And this mortiﬁed him and hurt
his feelings.
"It’s both," he said resolutely: "I don’t see that it was possible…"
"What! was it impossible, if the money were properly laid out, to provide
medical aid?"
"Impossible, as it seems to me…. For the three thousand square miles of our
district, what with our thaws, and the storms, and the work in the ﬁelds, I don’t
see how it is possible to provide medical aid all over. And besides, I don’t believe
in medicine."
"Oh, well, that’s unfair … I can quote to you thousands of instances…. But
the schools, anyway."
"Why have schools?"
"What do you mean? Can there be two opinions of the advantage of education? If it’s a good thing for you, it’s a good thing for everyone."
Konstantin Levin felt himself morally pinned against a wall, and so he got
hot, and unconsciously blurted out the chief cause of his indiﬀerence to public
business.
"Perhaps it may all be very good; but why should I worry myself about
establishing dispensaries which I shall never make use of, and schools to which I
shall never send my children, to which even the peasants don’t want to send their
children, and to which I’ve no very ﬁrm faith that they ought to send them?" said
he.
Sergey Ivanovitch was for a minute surprised at this unexpected view of
the subject; but he promptly made a new plan of aack. He was silent for a lile,
drew out a hook, threw it in again, and turned to his brother smiling.
"Come, now…. In the ﬁrst place, the dispensary is needed. We ourselves

ccxxii
sent for the district doctor for Agafea Mihalovna."
"Oh, well, but I fancy her wrist will never be straight again."
"at remains to be proved…. Next, the peasant who can read and write is
as a workman of more use and value to you."
"No, you can ask anyone you like," Konstantin Levin answered with decision,
"the man that can read and write is much inferior as a workman. And mending the
highroads is an impossibility; and as soon as they put up bridges they’re stolen."
"Still, that’s not the point," said Sergey Ivanovitch, frowning. He disliked
contradiction, and still more, arguments that were continually skipping from one
thing to another, introducing new and disconnected points, so that there was no
knowing to which to reply. "Do you admit that education is a beneﬁt for the
people?"
"Yes, I admit it," said Levin without thinking, and he was conscious immediately that he had said what he did not think. He felt that if he admied that,
it would be proved that he had been talking meaningless rubbish. How it would
be proved he could not tell, but he knew that this would inevitably be logically
proved to him, and he awaited the proofs.
e argument turned out to be far simpler than he had expected.
"If you admit that it is a beneﬁt," said Sergey Ivanovitch, "then, as an honest
man, you cannot help caring about it and sympathizing with the movement, and
so wishing to work for it."
"But I still do not admit this movement to be just," said Konstantin Levin,
reddening a lile.
"What! But you said just now…"
"at’s to say, I don’t admit it’s being either good or possible."
"at you can’t tell without making the trial."
"Well, supposing that’s so," said Levin, though he did not suppose so at all,
"supposing that is so, still I don’t see, all the same, what I’m to worry myself about
it for."
"How so?"
"No; since we are talking, explain it to me from the philosophical point of
view," said Levin.
"I can’t see where philosophy comes in," said Sergey Ivanovitch, in a tone,
Levin fancied, as though he did not admit his brother’s right to talk about philosophy. And that irritated Levin.
"I’ll tell you, then," he said with heat, "I imagine the mainspring of all our
actions is, aer all, self-interest. Now in the local institutions I, as a nobleman,
see nothing that could conduce to my prosperity, and the roads are not beer
and could not be beer; my horses carry me well enough over bad ones. Doctors
and dispensaries are no use to me. An arbitrator of disputes is no use to me. I

ccxxiii
never appeal to him, and never shall appeal to him. e schools are no good to
me, but positively harmful, as I told you. For me the district institutions simply
mean the liability to pay fourpence halfpenny for every three acres, to drive into
the town, sleep with bugs, and listen to all sorts of idiocy and loathsomeness, and
self-interest oﬀers me no inducement."
"Excuse me," Sergey Ivanovitch interposed with a smile, "self-interest did
not induce us to work for the emancipation of the serfs, but we did work for it."
"No!" Konstantin Levin broke in with still greater heat; "the emancipation
of the serfs was a diﬀerent maer. ere self-interest did come in. One longed
to throw oﬀ that yoke that crushed us, all decent people among us. But to be a
town councilor and discuss how many dustmen are needed, and how chimneys
shall be constructed in the town in which I don’t live—to serve on a jury and try
a peasant who’s stolen a ﬂitch of bacon, and listen for six hours at a stretch to
all sorts of jabber from the counsel for the defense and the prosecution, and the
president cross-examining my old half-wied Alioshka, ‘Do you admit, prisoner
in the dock, the fact of the removal of the bacon?’ ‘Eh?’"
Konstantin Levin had warmed to his subject, and began mimicking the president and the half-wied Alioshka: it seemed to him that it was all to the point.
But Sergey Ivanovitch shrugged his shoulders.
"Well, what do you mean to say, then?"
"I simply mean to say that those rights that touch me … my interest, I shall
always defend to the best of my ability; that when they made raids on us students, and the police read our leers, I was ready to defend those rights to the
utmost, to defend my rights to education and freedom. I can understand compulsory military service, which aﬀects my children, my brothers, and myself, I am
ready to deliberate on what concerns me; but deliberating on how to spend forty
thousand roubles of district council money, or judging the half-wied Alioshka—I
don’t understand, and I can’t do it."
Konstantin Levin spoke as though the ﬂoodgates of his speech had burst
open. Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.
"But tomorrow it’ll be your turn to be tried; would it have suited your tastes
beer to be tried in the old criminal tribunal?"
"I’m not going to be tried. I shan’t murder anybody, and I’ve no need of it.
Well, I tell you what," he went on, ﬂying oﬀ again to a subject quite beside the
point, "our district self-government and all the rest of it—it’s just like the birch
branches we stick in the ground on Trinity Day, for instance, to look like a copse
which has grown up of itself in Europe, and I can’t gush over these birch branches
and believe in them."
Sergey Ivanovitch merely shrugged his shoulders, as though to express his
wonder how the birch branches had come into their argument at that point,

ccxxiv
though he did really understand at once what his brother meant.
"Excuse me, but you know one really can’t argue in that way," he observed.
But Konstantin Levin wanted to justify himself for the failing, of which he
was conscious, of lack of zeal for the public welfare, and he went on.
"I imagine," he said, "that no sort of activity is likely to be lasting if it is not
founded on self-interest, that’s a universal principle, a philosophical principle," he
said, repeating the word "philosophical" with determination, as though wishing
to show that he had as much right as any one else to talk of philosophy.
Sergey Ivanovitch smiled. "He too has a philosophy of his own at the service
of his natural tendencies," he thought.
"Come, you’d beer let philosophy alone," he said. "e chief problem of the
philosophy of all ages consists just in ﬁnding the indispensable connection which
exists between individual and social interests. But that’s not to the point; what
is to the point is a correction I must make in your comparison. e birches are
not simply stuck in, but some are sown and some are planted, and one must deal
carefully with them. It’s only those peoples that have an intuitive sense of what’s
of importance and signiﬁcance in their institutions, and know how to value them,
that have a future before them—it’s only those peoples that one can truly call
historical."
And Sergey Ivanovitch carried the subject into the regions of philosophical
history where Konstantin Levin could not follow him, and showed him all the
incorrectness of his view.
"As for your dislike of it, excuse my saying so, that’s simply our Russian
sloth and old serf-owner’s ways, and I’m convinced that in you it’s a temporary
error and will pass."
Konstantin was silent. He felt himself vanquished on all sides, but he felt at
the same time that what he wanted to say was unintelligible to his brother. Only
he could not make up his mind whether it was unintelligible because he was not
capable of expressing his meaning clearly, or because his brother would not or
could not understand him. But he did not pursue the speculation, and without
replying, he fell to musing on a quite diﬀerent and personal maer.
Sergey Ivanovitch wound up the last line, untied the horse, and they drove
oﬀ.

Chapter 
e personal maer that absorbed Levin during his conversation with his brother
was this. Once in a previous year he had gone to look at the mowing, and being
made very angry by the bailiﬀ he had recourse to his favorite means for regaining

ccxxv
his temper,—he took a scythe from a peasant and began mowing.
He liked the work so much that he had several times tried his hand at mowing since. He had cut the whole of the meadow in front of his house, and this year
ever since the early spring he had cherished a plan for mowing for whole days
together with the peasants. Ever since his brother’s arrival, he had been in doubt
whether to mow or not. He was loath to leave his brother alone all day long, and
he was afraid his brother would laugh at him about it. But as he drove into the
meadow, and recalled the sensations of mowing, he came near deciding that he
would go mowing. Aer the irritating discussion with his brother, he pondered
over this intention again.
"I must have physical exercise, or my temper’ll certainly be ruined," he
thought, and he determined he would go mowing, however awkward he might
feel about it with his brother or the peasants.
Towards evening Konstantin Levin went to his counting house, gave directions as to the work to be done, and sent about the village to summon the mowers
for the morrow, to cut the hay in Kalinov meadow, the largest and best of his
grass lands.
"And send my scythe, please, to Tit, for him to set it, and bring it round
tomorrow. I shall maybe do some mowing myself too," he said, trying not to be
embarrassed.
e bailiﬀ smiled and said: "Yes, sir."
At tea the same evening Levin said to his brother:
"I fancy the ﬁne weather will last. Tomorrow I shall start mowing."
"I’m so fond of that form of ﬁeld labor," said Sergey Ivanovitch.
"I’m awfully fond of it. I sometimes mow myself with the peasants, and
tomorrow I want to try mowing the whole day."
Sergey Ivanovitch lied his head, and looked with interest at his brother.
"How do you mean? Just like one of the peasants, all day long?"
"Yes, it’s very pleasant," said Levin.
"It’s splendid as exercise, only you’ll hardly be able to stand it," said Sergey
Ivanovitch, without a shade of irony.
"I’ve tried it. It’s hard work at ﬁrst, but you get into it. I dare say I shall
manage to keep it up…"
"Really! what an idea! But tell me, how do the peasants look at it? I suppose
they laugh in their sleeves at their master’s being such a queer ﬁsh?"
"No, I don’t think so; but it’s so delightful, and at the same time such hard
work, that one has no time to think about it."
"But how will you do about dining with them? To send you a bole of Laﬁe
and roast turkey out there would be a lile awkward."
"No, I’ll simply come home at the time of their noonday rest."

ccxxvi
Next morning Konstantin Levin got up earlier than usual, but he was detained giving directions on the farm, and when he reached the mowing grass the
mowers were already at their second row.
From the uplands he could get a view of the shaded cut part of the meadow
below, with its grayish ridges of cut grass, and the black heaps of coats, taken oﬀ
by the mowers at the place from which they had started cuing.
Gradually, as he rode towards the meadow, the peasants came into sight,
some in coats, some in their shirts mowing, one behind another in a long string,
swinging their scythes diﬀerently. He counted forty-two of them.
ey were mowing slowly over the uneven, low-lying parts of the meadow,
where there had been an old dam. Levin recognized some of his own men. Here
was old Yermil in a very long white smock, bending forward to swing a scythe;
there was a young fellow, Vaska, who had been a coachman of Levin’s, taking
every row with a wide sweep. Here, too, was Tit, Levin’s preceptor in the art of
mowing, a thin lile peasant. He was in front of all, and cut his wide row without
bending, as though playing with the scythe.
Levin got oﬀ his mare, and fastening her up by the roadside went to meet
Tit, who took a second scythe out of a bush and gave it to him.
"It’s ready, sir; it’s like a razor, cuts of itself," said Tit, taking oﬀ his cap with
a smile and giving him the scythe.
Levin took the scythe, and began trying it. As they ﬁnished their rows, the
mowers, hot and good-humored, came out into the road one aer another, and,
laughing a lile, greeted the master. ey all stared at him, but no one made
any remark, till a tall old man, with a wrinkled, beardless face, wearing a short
sheepskin jacket, came out into the road and accosted him.
"Look’ee now, master, once take hold of the rope there’s no leing it go!" he
said, and Levin heard smothered laughter among the mowers.
"I’ll try not to let it go," he said, taking his stand behind Tit, and waiting for
the time to begin.
"Mind’ee," repeated the old man.
Tit made room, and Levin started behind him. e grass was short close
to the road, and Levin, who had not done any mowing for a long while, and
was disconcerted by the eyes fastened upon him, cut badly for the ﬁrst moments,
though he swung his scythe vigorously. Behind him he heard voices:
"It’s not set right; handle’s too high; see how he has to stoop to it," said one.
"Press more on the heel," said another.
"Never mind, he’ll get on all right," the old man resumed.
"He’s made a start…. You swing it too wide, you’ll tire yourself out…. e
master, sure, does his best for himself! But see the grass missed out! For such
work us fellows would catch it!"

ccxxvii
e grass became soer, and Levin, listening without answering, followed
Tit, trying to do the best he could. ey moved a hundred paces. Tit kept moving
on, without stopping, not showing the slightest weariness, but Levin was already
beginning to be afraid he would not be able to keep it up: he was so tired.
He felt as he swung his scythe that he was at the very end of his strength,
and was making up his mind to ask Tit to stop. But at that very moment Tit
stopped of his own accord, and stooping down picked up some grass, rubbed his
scythe, and began wheing it. Levin straightened himself, and drawing a deep
breath looked round. Behind him came a peasant, and he too was evidently tired,
for he stopped at once without waiting to mow up to Levin, and began wheing
his scythe. Tit sharpened his scythe and Levin’s, and they went on. e next
time it was just the same. Tit moved on with sweep aer sweep of his scythe,
not stopping nor showing signs of weariness. Levin followed him, trying not to
get le behind, and he found it harder and harder: the moment came when he
felt he had no strength le, but at that very moment Tit stopped and wheed the
scythes.
So they mowed the ﬁrst row. And this long row seemed particularly hard
work to Levin; but when the end was reached and Tit, shouldering his scythe,
began with deliberate stride returning on the tracks le by his heels in the cut
grass, and Levin walked back in the same way over the space he had cut, in spite
of the sweat that ran in streams over his face and fell in drops down his nose,
and drenched his back as though he had been soaked in water, he felt very happy.
What delighted him particularly was that now he knew he would be able to hold
out.
His pleasure was only disturbed by his row not being well cut. "I will swing
less with my arm and more with my whole body," he thought, comparing Tit’s
row, which looked as if it had been cut with a line, with his own unevenly and
irregularly lying grass.
e ﬁrst row, as Levin noticed, Tit had mowed specially quickly, probably
wishing to put his master to the test, and the row happened to be a long one. e
next rows were easier, but still Levin had to strain every nerve not to drop behind
the peasants.
He thought of nothing, wished for nothing, but not to be le behind the
peasants, and to do his work as well as possible. He heard nothing but the swish
of scythes, and saw before him Tit’s upright ﬁgure mowing away, the crescentshaped curve of the cut grass, the grass and ﬂower heads slowly and rhythmically
falling before the blade of his scythe, and ahead of him the end of the row, where
would come the rest.
Suddenly, in the midst of his toil, without understanding what it was or
whence it came, he felt a pleasant sensation of chill on his hot, moist shoulders.

ccxxviii
He glanced at the sky in the interval for wheing the scythes. A heavy, lowering
storm cloud had blown up, and big raindrops were falling. Some of the peasants went to their coats and put them on; others—just like Levin himself—merely
shrugged their shoulders, enjoying the pleasant coolness of it.
Another row, and yet another row, followed—long rows and short rows,
with good grass and with poor grass. Levin lost all sense of time, and could not
have told whether it was late or early now. A change began to come over his
work, which gave him immense satisfaction. In the midst of his toil there were
moments during which he forgot what he was doing, and it came all easy to him,
and at those same moments his row was almost as smooth and well cut as Tit’s.
But so soon as he recollected what he was doing, and began trying to do beer,
he was at once conscious of all the diﬃculty of his task, and the row was badly
mown.
On ﬁnishing yet another row he would have gone back to the top of the
meadow again to begin the next, but Tit stopped, and going up to the old man
said something in a low voice to him. ey both looked at the sun. "What are
they talking about, and why doesn’t he go back?" thought Levin, not guessing
that the peasants had been mowing no less than four hours without stopping,
and it was time for their lunch.
"Lunch, sir," said the old man.
"Is it really time? at’s right; lunch, then."
Levin gave his scythe to Tit, and together with the peasants, who were
crossing the long stretch of mown grass, slightly sprinkled with rain, to get their
bread from the heap of coats, he went towards his house. Only then he suddenly
awoke to the fact that he had been wrong about the weather and the rain was
drenching his hay.
"e hay will be spoiled," he said.
"Not a bit of it, sir; mow in the rain, and you’ll rake in ﬁne weather!" said
the old man.
Levin untied his horse and rode home to his coﬀee. Sergey Ivanovitch was
only just geing up. When he had drunk his coﬀee, Levin rode back again to the
mowing before Sergey Ivanovitch had had time to dress and come down to the
dining room.

Chapter 
Aer lunch Levin was not in the same place in the string of mowers as before,
but stood between the old man who had accosted him jocosely, and now invited
him to be his neighbor, and a young peasant, who had only been married in the

ccxxix
autumn, and who was mowing this summer for the ﬁrst time.
e old man, holding himself erect, moved in front, with his feet turned out,
taking long, regular strides, and with a precise and regular action which seemed
to cost him no more eﬀort than swinging one’s arms in walking, as though it were
in play, he laid down the high, even row of grass. It was as though it were not he
but the sharp scythe of itself swishing through the juicy grass.
Behind Levin came the lad Mishka. His prey, boyish face, with a twist
of fresh grass bound round his hair, was all working with eﬀort; but whenever
anyone looked at him he smiled. He would clearly have died sooner than own it
was hard work for him.
Levin kept between them. In the very heat of the day the mowing did not
seem such hard work to him. e perspiration with which he was drenched cooled
him, while the sun, that burned his back, his head, and his arms, bare to the elbow,
gave a vigor and dogged energy to his labor; and more and more oen now came
those moments of unconsciousness, when it was possible not to think what one
was doing. e scythe cut of itself. ese were happy moments. Still more delightful were the moments when they reached the stream where the rows ended,
and the old man rubbed his scythe with the wet, thick grass, rinsed its blade in
the fresh water of the stream, ladled out a lile in a tin dipper, and oﬀered Levin
a drink.
"What do you say to my home-brew, eh? Good, eh?" said he, winking.
And truly Levin had never drunk any liquor so good as this warm water with
green bits ﬂoating in it, and a taste of rust from the tin dipper. And immediately
aer this came the delicious, slow saunter, with his hand on the scythe, during
which he could wipe away the streaming sweat, take deep breaths of air, and look
about at the long string of mowers and at what was happening around in the
forest and the country.
e longer Levin mowed, the oener he felt the moments of unconsciousness in which it seemed not his hands that swung the scythe, but the scythe mowing of itself, a body full of life and consciousness of its own, and as though by
magic, without thinking of it, the work turned out regular and well-ﬁnished of
itself. ese were the most blissful moments.
It was only hard work when he had to break oﬀ the motion, which had
become unconscious, and to think; when he had to mow round a hillock or a tu
of sorrel. e old man did this easily. When a hillock came he changed his action,
and at one time with the heel, and at another with the tip of his scythe, clipped the
hillock round both sides with short strokes. And while he did this he kept looking
about and watching what came into his view: at one moment he picked a wild
berry and ate it or oﬀered it to Levin, then he ﬂung away a twig with the blade of
the scythe, then he looked at a quail’s nest, from which the bird ﬂew just under

ccxxx
the scythe, or caught a snake that crossed his path, and liing it on the scythe as
though on a fork showed it to Levin and threw it away.
For both Levin and the young peasant behind him, such changes of position
were diﬃcult. Both of them, repeating over and over again the same strained
movement, were in a perfect frenzy of toil, and were incapable of shiing their
position and at the same time watching what was before them.
Levin did not notice how time was passing. If he had been asked how long
he had been working he would have said half an hour—and it was geing on for
dinner time. As they were walking back over the cut grass, the old man called
Levin’s aention to the lile girls and boys who were coming from diﬀerent directions, hardly visible through the long grass, and along the road towards the
mowers, carrying sacks of bread dragging at their lile hands and pitchers of the
sour rye-beer, with cloths wrapped round them.
"Look’ee, the lile emmets crawling!" he said, pointing to them, and he
shaded his eyes with his hand to look at the sun. ey mowed two more rows;
the old man stopped.
"Come, master, dinner time!" he said briskly. And on reaching the stream
the mowers moved oﬀ across the lines of cut grass towards their pile of coats,
where the children who had brought their dinners were siing waiting for them.
e peasants gathered into groups—those further away under a cart, those nearer
under a willow bush.
Levin sat down by them; he felt disinclined to go away.
All constraint with the master had disappeared long ago. e peasants got
ready for dinner. Some washed, the young lads bathed in the stream, others made
a place comfortable for a rest, untied their sacks of bread, and uncovered the
pitchers of rye-beer. e old man crumbled up some bread in a cup, stirred it
with the handle of a spoon, poured water on it from the dipper, broke up some
more bread, and having seasoned it with salt, he turned to the east to say his
prayer.
"Come, master, taste my sop," said he, kneeling down before the cup.
e sop was so good that Levin gave up the idea of going home. He dined
with the old man, and talked to him about his family aﬀairs, taking the keenest
interest in them, and told him about his own aﬀairs and all the circumstances
that could be of interest to the old man. He felt much nearer to him than to his
brother, and could not help smiling at the aﬀection he felt for this man. When the
old man got up again, said his prayer, and lay down under a bush, puing some
grass under his head for a pillow, Levin did the same, and in spite of the clinging
ﬂies that were so persistent in the sunshine, and the midges that tickled his hot
face and body, he fell asleep at once and only waked when the sun had passed to
the other side of the bush and reached him. e old man had been awake a long

ccxxxi
while, and was siing up wheing the scythes of the younger lads.
Levin looked about him and hardly recognized the place, everything was
so changed. e immense stretch of meadow had been mown and was sparkling
with a peculiar fresh brilliance, with its lines of already sweet-smelling grass in
the slanting rays of the evening sun. And the bushes about the river had been cut
down, and the river itself, not visible before, now gleaming like steel in its bends,
and the moving, ascending, peasants, and the sharp wall of grass of the unmown
part of the meadow, and the hawks hovering over the stripped meadow—all was
perfectly new. Raising himself, Levin began considering how much had been cut
and how much more could still be done that day.
e work done was exceptionally much for forty-two men. ey had cut
the whole of the big meadow, which had, in the years of serf labor, taken thirty
scythes two days to mow. Only the corners remained to do, where the rows were
short. But Levin felt a longing to get as much mowing done that day as possible,
and was vexed with the sun sinking so quickly in the sky. He felt no weariness;
all he wanted was to get his work done more and more quickly and as much done
as possible.
"Could you cut Mashkin Upland too?—what do you think?" he said to the
old man.
"As God wills, the sun’s not high. A lile vodka for the lads?"
At the aernoon rest, when they were siing down again, and those who
smoked had lighted their pipes, the old man told the men that "Mashkin Upland’s
to be cut—there’ll be some vodka."
"Why not cut it? Come on, Tit! We’ll look sharp! We can eat at night. Come
on!" cried voices, and eating up their bread, the mowers went back to work.
"Come, lads, keep it up!" said Tit, and ran on ahead almost at a trot.
"Get along, get along!" said the old man, hurrying aer him and easily overtaking him, "I’ll mow you down, look out!"
And young and old mowed away, as though they were racing with one
another. But however fast they worked, they did not spoil the grass, and the rows
were laid just as neatly and exactly. e lile piece le uncut in the corner was
mown in ﬁve minutes. e last of the mowers were just ending their rows while
the foremost snatched up their coats onto their shoulders, and crossed the road
towards Mashkin Upland.
e sun was already sinking into the trees when they went with their jingling dippers into the wooded ravine of Mashkin Upland. e grass was up to
their waists in the middle of the hollow, so, tender, and feathery, spoed here
and there among the trees with wild heart’s-ease.
Aer a brief consultation—whether to take the rows lengthwise or diagonally—Prohor Yermilin, also a renowned mower, a huge, black-haired peasant,

ccxxxii
went on ahead. He went up to the top, turned back again and started mowing,
and they all proceeded to form in line behind him, going downhill through the
hollow and uphill right up to the edge of the forest. e sun sank behind the forest. e dew was falling by now; the mowers were in the sun only on the hillside,
but below, where a mist was rising, and on the opposite side, they mowed into the
fresh, dewy shade. e work went rapidly. e grass cut with a juicy sound, and
was at once laid in high, fragrant rows. e mowers from all sides, brought closer
together in the short row, kept urging one another on to the sound of jingling
dippers and clanging scythes, and the hiss of the whetstones sharpening them,
and good-humored shouts.
Levin still kept between the young peasant and the old man. e old man,
who had put on his short sheepskin jacket, was just as good-humored, jocose, and
free in his movements. Among the trees they were continually cuing with their
scythes the so-called "birch mushrooms," swollen fat in the succulent grass. But
the old man bent down every time he came across a mushroom, picked it up and
put it in his bosom. "Another present for my old woman," he said as he did so.
Easy as it was to mow the wet, so grass, it was hard work going up and
down the steep sides of the ravine. But this did not trouble the old man. Swinging
his scythe just as ever, and moving his feet in their big, plaited shoes with ﬁrm,
lile steps, he climbed slowly up the steep place, and though his breeches hanging
out below his smock, and his whole frame trembled with eﬀort, he did not miss
one blade of grass or one mushroom on his way, and kept making jokes with the
peasants and Levin. Levin walked aer him and oen thought he must fall, as
he climbed with a scythe up a steep cliﬀ where it would have been hard work to
clamber without anything. But he climbed up and did what he had to do. He felt
as though some external force were moving him.

Chapter 
Mashkin Upland was mown, the last row ﬁnished, the peasants had put on their
coats and were gaily trudging home. Levin got on his horse and, parting regretfully from the peasants, rode homewards. On the hillside he looked back; he could
not see them in the mist that had risen from the valley; he could only hear rough,
good-humored voices, laughter, and the sound of clanking scythes.
Sergey Ivanovitch had long ago ﬁnished dinner, and was drinking iced
lemon and water in his own room, looking through the reviews and papers which
he had only just received by post, when Levin rushed into the room, talking merrily, with his wet and maed hair sticking to his forehead, and his back and chest
grimed and moist.

ccxxxiii
"We mowed the whole meadow! Oh, it is nice, delicious! And how have you
been geing on?" said Levin, completely forgeing the disagreeable conversation
of the previous day.
"Mercy! what do you look like!" said Sergey Ivanovitch, for the ﬁrst moment
looking round with some dissatisfaction. "And the door, do shut the door!" he
cried. "You must have let in a dozen at least."
Sergey Ivanovitch could not endure ﬂies, and in his own room he never
opened the window except at night, and carefully kept the door shut.
"Not one, on my honor. But if I have, I’ll catch them. You wouldn’t believe
what a pleasure it is! How have you spent the day?"
"Very well. But have you really been mowing the whole day? I expect
you’re as hungry as a wolf. Kouzma has got everything ready for you."
"No, I don’t feel hungry even. I had something to eat there. But I’ll go and
wash."
"Yes, go along, go along, and I’ll come to you directly," said Sergey
Ivanovitch, shaking his head as he looked at his brother. "Go along, make haste,"
he added smiling, and gathering up his books, he prepared to go too. He, too, felt
suddenly good-humored and disinclined to leave his brother’s side. "But what did
you do while it was raining?"
"Rain? Why, there was scarcely a drop. I’ll come directly. So you had a nice
day too? at’s ﬁrst-rate." And Levin went oﬀ to change his clothes.
Five minutes later the brothers met in the dining room. Although it seemed
to Levin that he was not hungry, and he sat down to dinner simply so as not
to hurt Kouzma’s feelings, yet when he began to eat the dinner struck him as
extraordinarily good. Sergey Ivanovitch watched him with a smile.
"Oh, by the way, there’s a leer for you," said he. "Kouzma, bring it down,
please. And mind you shut the doors."
e leer was from Oblonsky. Levin read it aloud. Oblonsky wrote to him
from Petersburg: "I have had a leer from Dolly; she’s at Ergushovo, and everything seems going wrong there. Do ride over and see her, please; help her with
advice; you know all about it. She will be so glad to see you. She’s quite alone,
poor thing. My mother-in-law and all of them are still abroad."
"at’s capital! I will certainly ride over to her," said Levin. "Or we’ll go
together. She’s such a splendid woman, isn’t she?"
"ey’re not far from here, then?"
"Twenty-ﬁve miles. Or perhaps it is thirty. But a capital road. Capital, we’ll
drive over."
"I shall be delighted," said Sergey Ivanovitch, still smiling. e sight of his
younger brother’s appearance had immediately put him in a good humor.
"Well, you have an appetite!" he said, looking at his dark-red, sunburnt face

ccxxxiv
and neck bent over the plate.
"Splendid! You can’t imagine what an eﬀectual remedy it is for every sort
of foolishness. I want to enrich medicine with a new word: Arbeitskur."
"Well, but you don’t need it, I should fancy."
"No, but for all sorts of nervous invalids."
"Yes, it ought to be tried. I had meant to come to the mowing to look at you,
but it was so unbearably hot that I got no further than the forest. I sat there a
lile, and went on by the forest to the village, met your old nurse, and sounded
her as to the peasants’ view of you. As far as I can make out, they don’t approve
of this. She said: ‘It’s not a gentleman’s work.’ Altogether, I fancy that in the
people’s ideas there are very clear and deﬁnite notions of certain, as they call
it, ‘gentlemanly’ lines of action. And they don’t sanction the gentry’s moving
outside bounds clearly laid down in their ideas."
"Maybe so; but anyway it’s a pleasure such as I have never known in my
life. And there’s no harm in it, you know. Is there?" answered Levin. "I can’t help
it if they don’t like it. ough I do believe it’s all right. Eh?"
"Altogether," pursued Sergey Ivanovitch, "you’re satisﬁed with your day?"
"ite satisﬁed. We cut the whole meadow. And such a splendid old man I
made friends with there! You can’t fancy how delightful he was!"
"Well, so you’re content with your day. And so am I. First, I solved two
chess problems, and one a very prey one—a pawn opening. I’ll show it you.
And then—I thought over our conversation yesterday."
"Eh! our conversation yesterday?" said Levin, blissfully dropping his eyelids
and drawing deep breaths aer ﬁnishing his dinner, and absolutely incapable of
recalling what their conversation yesterday was about.
"I think you are partly right. Our diﬀerence of opinion amounts to this,
that you make the mainspring self-interest, while I suppose that interest in the
common weal is bound to exist in every man of a certain degree of advancement.
Possibly you are right too, that action founded on material interest would be more
desirable. You are altogether, as the French say, too primesautière a nature; you
must have intense, energetic action, or nothing."
Levin listened to his brother and did not understand a single word, and
did not want to understand. He was only afraid his brother might ask him some
question which would make it evident he had not heard.
"So that’s what I think it is, my dear boy," said Sergey Ivanovitch, touching
him on the shoulder.
"Yes, of course. But, do you know? I won’t stand up for my view," answered
Levin, with a guilty, childlike smile. "Whatever was it I was disputing about?"
he wondered. "Of course, I’m right, and he’s right, and it’s all ﬁrst-rate. Only I
must go round to the counting house and see to things." He got up, stretching and

ccxxxv
smiling. Sergey Ivanovitch smiled too.
"If you want to go out, let’s go together," he said, disinclined to be parted
from his brother, who seemed positively breathing out freshness and energy.
"Come, we’ll go to the counting house, if you have to go there."
"Oh, heavens!" shouted Levin, so loudly that Sergey Ivanovitch was quite
frightened.
"What, what is the maer?"
"How’s Agafea Mihalovna’s hand?" said Levin, slapping himself on the
head. "I’d positively forgoen her even."
"It’s much beer."
"Well, anyway I’ll run down to her. Before you’ve time to get your hat on,
I’ll be back."
And he ran downstairs, claering with his heels like a spring-rale.

Chapter 
Stephan Arkadyevitch had gone to Petersburg to perform the most natural and
essential oﬃcial duty—so familiar to everyone in the government service, though
incomprehensible to outsiders—that duty, but for which one could hardly be in
government service, of reminding the ministry of his existence—and having, for
the due performance of this rite, taken all the available cash from home, was gaily
and agreeably spending his days at the races and in the summer villas. Meanwhile
Dolly and the children had moved into the country, to cut down expenses as much
as possible. She had gone to Ergushovo, the estate that had been her dowry,
and the one where in spring the forest had been sold. It was nearly forty miles
from Levin’s Pokrovskoe. e big, old house at Ergushovo had been pulled down
long ago, and the old prince had had the lodge done up and built on to. Twenty
years before, when Dolly was a child, the lodge had been roomy and comfortable,
though, like all lodges, it stood sideways to the entrance avenue, and faced the
south. But by now this lodge was old and dilapidated. When Stepan Arkadyevitch
had gone down in the spring to sell the forest, Dolly had begged him to look over
the house and order what repairs might be needed. Stepan Arkadyevitch, like all
unfaithful husbands indeed, was very solicitous for his wife’s comfort, and he had
himself looked over the house, and given instructions about everything that he
considered necessary. What he considered necessary was to cover all the furniture
with cretonne, to put up curtains, to weed the garden, to make a lile bridge on
the pond, and to plant ﬂowers. But he forgot many other essential maers, the
want of which greatly distressed Darya Alexandrovna later on.
In spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eﬀorts to be an aentive father and hus-

ccxxxvi
band, he never could keep in his mind that he had a wife and children. He had
bachelor tastes, and it was in accordance with them that he shaped his life. On his
return to Moscow he informed his wife with pride that everything was ready, that
the house would be a lile paradise, and that he advised her most certainly to go.
His wife’s staying away in the country was very agreeable to Stepan Arkadyevitch
from every point of view: it did the children good, it decreased expenses, and it
le him more at liberty. Darya Alexandrovna regarded staying in the country
for the summer as essential for the children, especially for the lile girl, who had
not succeeded in regaining her strength aer the scarlatina, and also as a means
of escaping the pey humiliations, the lile bills owing to the wood-merchant,
the ﬁshmonger, the shoemaker, which made her miserable. Besides this, she was
pleased to go away to the country because she was dreaming of geing her sister
Kiy to stay with her there. Kiy was to be back from abroad in the middle of the
summer, and bathing had been prescribed for her. Kiy wrote that no prospect
was so alluring as to spend the summer with Dolly at Ergushovo, full of childish
associations for both of them.
e ﬁrst days of her existence in the country were very hard for Dolly. She
used to stay in the country as a child, and the impression she had retained of
it was that the country was a refuge from all the unpleasantness of the town,
that life there, though not luxurious—Dolly could easily make up her mind to
that—was cheap and comfortable; that there was plenty of everything, everything
was cheap, everything could be got, and children were happy. But now coming
to the country as the head of a family, she perceived that it was all uerly unlike
what she had fancied.
e day aer their arrival there was a heavy fall of rain, and in the night
the water came through in the corridor and in the nursery, so that the beds had to
be carried into the drawing room. ere was no kitchen maid to be found; of the
nine cows, it appeared from the words of the cowherd-woman that some were
about to calve, others had just calved, others were old, and others again harduddered; there was not buer nor milk enough even for the children. ere were
no eggs. ey could get no fowls; old, purplish, stringy cocks were all they had
for roasting and boiling. Impossible to get women to scrub the ﬂoors—all were
potato-hoeing. Driving was out of the question, because one of the horses was
restive, and bolted in the shas. ere was no place where they could bathe; the
whole of the river-bank was trampled by the cale and open to the road; even
walks were impossible, for the cale strayed into the garden through a gap in
the hedge, and there was one terrible bull, who bellowed, and therefore might be
expected to gore somebody. ere were no proper cupboards for their clothes;
what cupboards there were either would not close at all, or burst open whenever
anyone passed by them. ere were no pots and pans; there was no copper in the

ccxxxvii
washhouse, nor even an ironing-board in the maids’ room.
Finding instead of peace and rest all these, from her point of view, fearful
calamities, Darya Alexandrovna was at ﬁrst in despair. She exerted herself to the
utmost, felt the hopelessness of the position, and was every instant suppressing
the tears that started into her eyes. e bailiﬀ, a retired quartermaster, whom
Stepan Arkadyevitch had taken a fancy to and had appointed bailiﬀ on account
of his handsome and respectful appearance as a hall-porter, showed no sympathy
for Darya Alexandrovna’s woes. He said respectfully, "nothing can be done, the
peasants are such a wretched lot," and did nothing to help her.
e position seemed hopeless. But in the Oblonskys’ household, as in all
families indeed, there was one inconspicuous but most valuable and useful person, Marya Philimonovna. She soothed her mistress, assured her that everything
would come round (it was her expression, and Matvey had borrowed it from her),
and without fuss or hurry proceeded to set to work herself. She had immediately made friends with the baili’s wife, and on the very ﬁrst day she drank tea
with her and the bailiﬀ under the acacias, and reviewed all the circumstances of
the position. Very soon Marya Philimonovna had established her club, so to say,
under the acacias, and there it was, in this club, consisting of the baili’s wife,
the village elder, and the counting house clerk, that the diﬃculties of existence
were gradually smoothed away, and in a week’s time everything actually had
come round. e roof was mended, a kitchen maid was found—a crony of the
village elder’s—hens were bought, the cows began giving milk, the garden hedge
was stopped up with stakes, the carpenter made a mangle, hooks were put in the
cupboards, and they ceased to burst open spontaneously, and an ironing-board
covered with army cloth was placed across from the arm of a chair to the chest of
drawers, and there was a smell of ﬂatirons in the maids’ room.
"Just see, now, and you were quite in despair," said Marya Philimonovna,
pointing to the ironing-board. ey even rigged up a bathing-shed of straw hurdles. Lily began to bathe, and Darya Alexandrovna began to realize, if only in part,
her expectations, if not of a peaceful, at least of a comfortable, life in the country. Peaceful with six children Darya Alexandrovna could not be. One would fall
ill, another might easily become so, a third would be without something necessary, a fourth would show symptoms of a bad disposition, and so on. Rare indeed
were the brief periods of peace. But these cares and anxieties were for Darya
Alexandrovna the sole happiness possible. Had it not been for them, she would
have been le alone to brood over her husband who did not love her. And besides, hard though it was for the mother to bear the dread of illness, the illnesses
themselves, and the grief of seeing signs of evil propensities in her children—the
children themselves were even now repaying her in small joys for her suﬀerings.
ose joys were so small that they passed unnoticed, like gold in sand, and at bad

ccxxxviii
moments she could see nothing but the pain, nothing but sand; but there were
good moments too when she saw nothing but the joy, nothing but gold.
Now in the solitude of the country, she began to be more and more frequently aware of those joys. Oen, looking at them, she would make every possible eﬀort to persuade herself that she was mistaken, that she as a mother was
partial to her children. All the same, she could not help saying to herself that she
had charming children, all six of them in diﬀerent ways, but a set of children such
as is not oen to be met with, and she was happy in them, and proud of them.

Chapter 
Towards the end of May, when everything had been more or less satisfactorily arranged, she received her husband’s answer to her complaints of the disorganized
state of things in the country. He wrote begging her forgiveness for not having
thought of everything before, and promised to come down at the ﬁrst chance. is
chance did not present itself, and till the beginning of June Darya Alexandrovna
stayed alone in the country.
On the Sunday in St. Peter’s week Darya Alexandrovna drove to mass for
all her children to take the sacrament. Darya Alexandrovna in her intimate, philosophical talks with her sister, her mother, and her friends very oen astonished
them by the freedom of her views in regard to religion. She had a strange religion of transmigration of souls all her own, in which she had ﬁrm faith, troubling
herself lile about the dogmas of the Church. But in her family she was strict
in carrying out all that was required by the Church—and not merely in order to
set an example, but with all her heart in it. e fact that the children had not
been at the sacrament for nearly a year worried her extremely, and with the full
approval and sympathy of Marya Philimonovna she decided that this should take
place now in the summer.
For several days before, Darya Alexandrovna was busily deliberating on
how to dress all the children. Frocks were made or altered and washed, seams and
ﬂounces were let out, buons were sewn on, and ribbons got ready. One dress,
Tanya’s, which the English governess had undertaken, cost Darya Alexandrovna
much loss of temper. e English governess in altering it had made the seams
in the wrong place, had taken up the sleeves too much, and altogether spoilt the
dress. It was so narrow on Tanya’s shoulders that it was quite painful to look
at her. But Marya Philimonovna had the happy thought of puing in gussets,
and adding a lile shoulder-cape. e dress was set right, but there was nearly
a quarrel with the English governess. On the morning, however, all was happily
arranged, and towards ten o’clock—the time at which they had asked the priest

ccxxxix
to wait for them for the mass—the children in their new dresses, with beaming
faces, stood on the step before the carriage waiting for their mother.
To the carriage, instead of the restive Raven, they had harnessed, thanks
to the representations of Marya Philimonovna, the baili’s horse, Brownie, and
Darya Alexandrovna, delayed by anxiety over her own aire, came out and got
in, dressed in a white muslin gown.
Darya Alexandrovna had done her hair, and dressed with care and excitement. In the old days she had dressed for her own sake to look prey and be
admired. Later on, as she got older, dress became more and more distasteful to
her. She saw that she was losing her good looks. But now she began to feel pleasure and interest in dress again. Now she did not dress for her own sake, not
for the sake of her own beauty, but simply that as the mother of those exquisite
creatures she might not spoil the general eﬀect. And looking at herself for the
last time in the looking-glass she was satisﬁed with herself. She looked nice. Not
nice as she would have wished to look nice in old days at a ball, but nice for the
object which she now had in view.
In the church there was no one but the peasants, the servants and their
women-folk. But Darya Alexandrovna saw, or fancied she saw, the sensation
produced by her children and her. e children were not only beautiful to look
at in their smart lile dresses, but they were charming in the way they behaved.
Aliosha, it is true, did not stand quite correctly; he kept turning round, trying to
look at his lile jacket from behind; but all the same he was wonderfully sweet.
Tanya behaved like a grownup person, and looked aer the lile ones. And the
smallest, Lily, was bewitching in her naïve astonishment at everything, and it was
diﬃcult not to smile when, aer taking the sacrament, she said in English, "Please,
some more."
On the way home the children felt that something solemn had happened,
and were very sedate.
Everything went happily at home too; but at lunch Grisha began whistling,
and, what was worse, was disobedient to the English governess, and was forbidden to have any tart. Darya Alexandrovna would not have let things go so far on
such a day had she been present; but she had to support the English governess’s
authority, and she upheld her decision that Grisha should have no tart. is rather
spoiled the general good humor. Grisha cried, declaring that Nikolinka had whistled too, and he was not punished, and that he wasn’t crying for the tart—he didn’t
care—but at being unjustly treated. is was really too tragic, and Darya Alexandrovna made up her mind to persuade the English governess to forgive Grisha,
and she went to speak to her. But on the way, as she passed the drawing room,
she beheld a scene, ﬁlling her heart with such pleasure that the tears came into
her eyes, and she forgave the delinquent herself.

ccxl
e culprit was siing at the window in the corner of the drawing room;
beside him was standing Tanya with a plate. On the pretext of wanting to give
some dinner to her dolls, she had asked the governess’s permission to take her
share of tart to the nursery, and had taken it instead to her brother. While still
weeping over the injustice of his punishment, he was eating the tart, and kept
saying through his sobs, "Eat yourself; let’s eat it together … together."
Tanya had at ﬁrst been under the inﬂuence of her pity for Grisha, then of a
sense of her noble action, and tears were standing in her eyes too; but she did not
refuse, and ate her share.
On catching sight of their mother they were dismayed, but, looking into her
face, they saw they were not doing wrong. ey burst out laughing, and, with
their mouths full of tart, they began wiping their smiling lips with their hands,
and smearing their radiant faces all over with tears and jam.
"Mercy! Your new white frock! Tanya! Grisha!" said their mother, trying
to save the frock, but with tears in her eyes, smiling a blissful, rapturous smile.
e new frocks were taken oﬀ, and orders were given for the lile girls to
have their blouses put on, and the boys their old jackets, and the wagonee to be
harnessed; with Brownie, to the baili’s annoyance, again in the shas, to drive
out for mushroom picking and bathing. A roar of delighted shrieks arose in the
nursery, and never ceased till they had set oﬀ for the bathing-place.
ey gathered a whole basketful of mushrooms; even Lily found a birch
mushroom. It had always happened before that Miss Hoole found them and
pointed them out to her; but this time she found a big one quite of herself, and
there was a general scream of delight, "Lily has found a mushroom!"
en they reached the river, put the horses under the birch trees, and went
to the bathing-place. e coachman, Terenty, fastened the horses, who kept
whisking away the ﬂies, to a tree, and, treading down the grass, lay down in the
shade of a birch and smoked his shag, while the never-ceasing shrieks of delight
of the children ﬂoated across to him from the bathing-place.
ough it was hard work to look aer all the children and restrain their wild
pranks, though it was diﬃcult too to keep in one’s head and not mix up all the
stockings, lile breeches, and shoes for the diﬀerent legs, and to undo and to do
up again all the tapes and buons, Darya Alexandrovna, who had always liked
bathing herself, and believed it to be very good for the children, enjoyed nothing
so much as bathing with all the children. To go over all those fat lile legs, pulling
on their stockings, to take in her arms and dip those lile naked bodies, and to
hear their screams of delight and alarm, to see the breathless faces with wideopen, scared, and happy eyes of all her splashing cherubs, was a great pleasure to
her.
When half the children had been dressed, some peasant women in holiday

ccxli
dress, out picking herbs, came up to the bathing-shed and stopped shyly. Marya
Philimonovna called one of them and handed her a sheet and a shirt that had
dropped into the water for her to dry them, and Darya Alexandrovna began to
talk to the women. At ﬁrst they laughed behind their hands and did not understand her questions, but soon they grew bolder and began to talk, winning Darya
Alexandrovna’s heart at once by the genuine admiration of the children that they
showed.
"My, what a beauty! as white as sugar," said one, admiring Tanitchka, and
shaking her head; "but thin…"
"Yes, she has been ill."
"And so they’ve been bathing you too," said another to the baby.
"No; he’s only three months old," answered Darya Alexandrovna with pride.
"You don’t say so!"
"And have you any children?"
"I’ve had four; I’ve two living—a boy and a girl. I weaned her last carnival."
"How old is she?"
"Why, two years old."
"Why did you nurse her so long?"
"It’s our custom; for three fasts…"
And the conversation became most interesting to Darya Alexandrovna.
What sort of time did she have? What was the maer with the boy? Where
was her husband? Did it oen happen?
Darya Alexandrovna felt disinclined to leave the peasant women, so interesting to her was their conversation, so completely identical were all their interests. What pleased her most of all was that she saw clearly what all the women
admired more than anything was her having so many children, and such ﬁne ones.
e peasant women even made Darya Alexandrovna laugh, and oﬀended the English governess, because she was the cause of the laughter she did not understand.
One of the younger women kept staring at the Englishwoman, who was dressing
aer all the rest, and when she put on her third peicoat she could not refrain
from the remark, "My, she keeps puing on and puing on, and she’ll never have
done!" she said, and they all went oﬀ into roars.

Chapter 
On the drive home, as Darya Alexandrovna, with all her children round her, their
heads still wet from their bath, and a kerchief tied over her own head, was geing
near the house, the coachman said, "ere’s some gentleman coming: the master
of Pokrovskoe, I do believe."

ccxlii
Darya Alexandrovna peeped out in front, and was delighted when she recognized in the gray hat and gray coat the familiar ﬁgure of Levin walking to meet
them. She was glad to see him at any time, but at this moment she was specially
glad he should see her in all her glory. No one was beer able to appreciate her
grandeur than Levin.
Seeing her, he found himself face to face with one of the pictures of his
daydream of family life.
"You’re like a hen with your chickens, Darya Alexandrovna."
"Ah, how glad I am to see you!" she said, holding out her hand to him.
"Glad to see me, but you didn’t let me know. My brother’s staying with me.
I got a note from Stiva that you were here."
"From Stiva?" Darya Alexandrovna asked with surprise.
"Yes; he writes that you are here, and that he thinks you might allow me to
be of use to you," said Levin, and as he said it he became suddenly embarrassed,
and, stopping abruptly, he walked on in silence by the wagonee, snapping oﬀ
the buds of the lime trees and nibbling them. He was embarrassed through a sense
that Darya Alexandrovna would be annoyed by receiving from an outsider help
that should by rights have come from her own husband. Darya Alexandrovna certainly did not like this lile way of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s of foisting his domestic
duties on others. And she was at once aware that Levin was aware of this. It was
just for this ﬁneness of perception, for this delicacy, that Darya Alexandrovna
liked Levin.
"I know, of course," said Levin, "that that simply means that you would like
to see me, and I’m exceedingly glad. ough I can fancy that, used to town housekeeping as you are, you must feel in the wilds here, and if there’s anything wanted,
I’m altogether at your disposal."
"Oh, no!" said Dolly. "At ﬁrst things were rather uncomfortable, but now
we’ve seled everything capitally—thanks to my old nurse," she said, indicating
Marya Philimonovna, who, seeing that they were speaking of her, smiled brightly
and cordially to Levin. She knew him, and knew that he would be a good match
for her young lady, and was very keen to see the maer seled.
"Won’t you get in, sir, we’ll make room this side!" she said to him.
"No, I’ll walk. Children, who’d like to race the horses with me?" e children knew Levin very lile, and could not remember when they had seen him,
but they experienced in regard to him none of that strange feeling of shyness
and hostility which children so oen experience towards hypocritical, grown-up
people, and for which they are so oen and miserably punished. Hypocrisy in
anything whatever may deceive the cleverest and most penetrating man, but the
least wide-awake of children recognizes it, and is revolted by it, however ingeniously it may be disguised. Whatever faults Levin had, there was not a trace of

ccxliii
hypocrisy in him, and so the children showed him the same friendliness that they
saw in their mother’s face. On his invitation, the two elder ones at once jumped
out to him and ran with him as simply as they would have done with their nurse
or Miss Hoole or their mother. Lily, too, began begging to go to him, and her
mother handed her to him; he sat her on his shoulder and ran along with her.
"Don’t be afraid, don’t be afraid, Darya Alexandrovna!" he said, smiling
good-humoredly to the mother; "there’s no chance of my hurting or dropping
her."
And, looking at his strong, agile, assiduously careful and needlessly wary
movements, the mother felt her mind at rest, and smiled gaily and approvingly as
she watched him.
Here, in the country, with children, and with Darya Alexandrovna, with
whom he was in sympathy, Levin was in a mood not infrequent with him, of
childlike light-heartedness that she particularly liked in him. As he ran with the
children, he taught them gymnastic feats, set Miss Hoole laughing with his queer
English accent, and talked to Darya Alexandrovna of his pursuits in the country.
Aer dinner, Darya Alexandrovna, siing alone with him on the balcony,
began to speak of Kiy.
"You know, Kiy’s coming here, and is going to spend the summer with me."
"Really," he said, ﬂushing, and at once, to change the conversation, he said:
"en I’ll send you two cows, shall I? If you insist on a bill you shall pay me ﬁve
roubles a month; but it’s really too bad of you."
"No, thank you. We can manage very well now."
"Oh, well, then, I’ll have a look at your cows, and if you’ll allow me, I’ll give
directions about their food. Everything depends on their food."
And Levin, to turn the conversation, explained to Darya Alexandrovna the
theory of cow-keeping, based on the principle that the cow is simply a machine
for the transformation of food into milk, and so on.
He talked of this, and passionately longed to hear more of Kiy, and, at the
same time, was afraid of hearing it. He dreaded the breaking up of the inward
peace he had gained with such eﬀort.
"Yes, but still all this has to be looked aer, and who is there to look aer
it?" Darya Alexandrovna responded, without interest.
She had by now got her household maers so satisfactorily arranged, thanks
to Marya Philimonovna, that she was disinclined to make any change in them;
besides, she had no faith in Levin’s knowledge of farming. General principles,
as to the cow being a machine for the production of milk, she looked on with
suspicion. It seemed to her that such principles could only be a hindrance in farm
management. It all seemed to her a far simpler maer: all that was needed, as
Marya Philimonovna had explained, was to give Brindle and Whitebreast more

ccxliv
food and drink, and not to let the cook carry all the kitchen slops to the laundry
maid’s cow. at was clear. But general propositions as to feeding on meal and
on grass were doubtful and obscure. And, what was most important, she wanted
to talk about Kiy.

Chapter 
"Kiy writes to me that there’s nothing she longs for so much as quiet and solitude," Dolly said aer the silence that had followed.
"And how is she—beer?" Levin asked in agitation.
"ank God, she’s quite well again. I never believed her lungs were aﬀected."
"Oh, I’m very glad!" said Levin, and Dolly fancied she saw something touching, helpless, in his face as he said this and looked silently into her face.
"Let me ask you, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling her kindly and rather mocking smile, "why is it you are angry with Kiy?"
"I? I’m not angry with her," said Levin.
"Yes, you are angry. Why was it you did not come to see us nor them when
you were in Moscow?"
"Darya Alexandrovna," he said, blushing up to the roots of his hair, "I wonder
really that with your kind heart you don’t feel this. How it is you feel no pity for
me, if nothing else, when you know…"
"What do I know?"
"You know I made an oﬀer and that I was refused," said Levin, and all the
tenderness he had been feeling for Kiy a minute before was replaced by a feeling
of anger for the slight he had suﬀered.
"What makes you suppose I know?"
"Because everybody knows it…"
"at’s just where you are mistaken; I did not know it, though I had guessed
it was so."
"Well, now you know it."
"All I knew was that something had happened that made her dreadfully
miserable, and that she begged me never to speak of it. And if she would not tell
me, she would certainly not speak of it to anyone else. But what did pass between
you? Tell me."
"I have told you."
"When was it?"
"When I was at their house the last time."
"Do you know that," said Darya Alexandrovna, "I am awfully, awfully sorry
for her. You suﬀer only from pride…."

ccxlv
"Perhaps so," said Levin, "but…"
She interrupted him.
"But she, poor girl … I am awfully, awfully sorry for her. Now I see it all."
"Well, Darya Alexandrovna, you must excuse me," he said, geing up.
"Good-bye, Darya Alexandrovna, till we meet again."
"No, wait a minute," she said, clutching him by the sleeve. "Wait a minute,
sit down."
"Please, please, don’t let us talk of this," he said, siing down, and at the
same time feeling rise up and stir within his heart a hope he had believed to be
buried.
"If I did not like you," she said, and tears came into her eyes; "if I did not
know you, as I do know you . . ."
e feeling that had seemed dead revived more and more, rose up and took
possession of Levin’s heart.
"Yes, I understand it all now," said Darya Alexandrovna. "You can’t understand it; for you men, who are free and make your own choice, it’s always clear
whom you love. But a girl’s in a position of suspense, with all a woman’s or
maiden’s modesty, a girl who sees you men from afar, who takes everything on
trust,—a girl may have, and oen has, such a feeling that she cannot tell what to
say."
"Yes, if the heart does not speak…"
"No, the heart does speak; but just consider: you men have views about a
girl, you come to the house, you make friends, you criticize, you wait to see if you
have found what you love, and then, when you are sure you love her, you make
an oﬀer…."
"Well, that’s not quite it."
"Anyway you make an oﬀer, when your love is ripe or when the balance
has completely turned between the two you are choosing from. But a girl is not
asked. She is expected to make her choice, and yet she cannot choose, she can
only answer ‘yes’ or ‘no.’"
"Yes, to choose between me and Vronsky," thought Levin, and the dead thing
that had come to life within him died again, and only weighed on his heart and
set it aching.
"Darya Alexandrovna," he said, "that’s how one chooses a new dress or some
purchase or other, not love. e choice has been made, and so much the beer….
And there can be no repeating it."
"Ah, pride, pride!" said Darya Alexandrovna, as though despising him for
the baseness of this feeling in comparison with that other feeling which only
women know. "At the time when you made Kiy an oﬀer she was just in a position in which she could not answer. She was in doubt. Doubt between you and

ccxlvi
Vronsky. Him she was seeing every day, and you she had not seen for a long
while. Supposing she had been older … I, for instance, in her place could have
felt no doubt. I always disliked him, and so it has turned out."
Levin recalled Kiy’s answer. She had said: "No, that cannot be…"
"Darya Alexandrovna," he said dryly, "I appreciate your conﬁdence in me;
I believe you are making a mistake. But whether I am right or wrong, that pride
you so despise makes any thought of Katerina Alexandrovna out of the question
for me,—you understand, uerly out of the question."
"I will only say one thing more: you know that I am speaking of my sister,
whom I love as I love my own children. I don’t say she cared for you, all I meant
to say is that her refusal at that moment proves nothing."
"I don’t know!" said Levin, jumping up. "If you only knew how you are
hurting me. It’s just as if a child of yours were dead, and they were to say to you:
He would have been like this and like that, and he might have lived, and how
happy you would have been in him. But he’s dead, dead, dead!…"
"How absurd you are!" said Darya Alexandrovna, looking with mournful
tenderness at Levin’s excitement. "Yes, I see it all more and more clearly," she
went on musingly. "So you won’t come to see us, then, when Kiy’s here?"
"No, I shan’t come. Of course I won’t avoid meeting Katerina Alexandrovna,
but as far as I can, I will try to save her the annoyance of my presence."
"You are very, very absurd," repeated Darya Alexandrovna, looking with
tenderness into his face. "Very well then, let it be as though we had not spoken
of this. What have you come for, Tanya?" she said in French to the lile girl who
had come in.
"Where’s my spade, mamma?"
"I speak French, and you must too."
e lile girl tried to say it in French, but could not remember the French
for spade; the mother prompted her, and then told her in French where to look
for the spade. And this made a disagreeable impression on Levin.
Everything in Darya Alexandrovna’s house and children struck him now
as by no means so charming as a lile while before. "And what does she talk
French with the children for?" he thought; "how unnatural and false it is! And
the children feel it so: Learning French and unlearning sincerity," he thought to
himself, unaware that Darya Alexandrovna had thought all that over twenty times
already, and yet, even at the cost of some loss of sincerity, believed it necessary
to teach her children French in that way.
"But why are you going? Do stay a lile."
Levin stayed to tea; but his good-humor had vanished, and he felt ill at ease.
Aer tea he went out into the hall to order his horses to be put in, and, when
he came back, he found Darya Alexandrovna greatly disturbed, with a troubled

ccxlvii
face, and tears in her eyes. While Levin had been outside, an incident had occurred
which had uerly shaered all the happiness she had been feeling that day, and
her pride in her children. Grisha and Tanya had been ﬁghting over a ball. Darya
Alexandrovna, hearing a scream in the nursery, ran in and saw a terrible sight.
Tanya was pulling Grisha’s hair, while he, with a face hideous with rage, was
beating her with his ﬁsts wherever he could get at her. Something snapped in
Darya Alexandrovna’s heart when she saw this. It was as if darkness had swooped
down upon her life; she felt that these children of hers, that she was so proud of,
were not merely most ordinary, but positively bad, ill-bred children, with coarse,
brutal propensities—wicked children.
She could not talk or think of anything else, and she could not speak to
Levin of her misery.
Levin saw she was unhappy and tried to comfort her, saying that it showed
nothing bad, that all children ﬁght; but, even as he said it, he was thinking in his
heart: "No, I won’t be artiﬁcial and talk French with my children; but my children
won’t be like that. All one has to do is not spoil children, not to distort their
nature, and they’ll be delightful. No, my children won’t be like that."
He said good-bye and drove away, and she did not try to keep him.

Chapter 
In the middle of July the elder of the village on Levin’s sister’s estate, about ﬁeen
miles from Pokrovskoe, came to Levin to report on how things were going there
and on the hay. e chief source of income on his sister’s estate was from the
riverside meadows. In former years the hay had been bought by the peasants for
twenty roubles the three acres. When Levin took over the management of the
estate, he thought on examining the grasslands that they were worth more, and
he ﬁxed the price at twenty-ﬁve roubles the three acres. e peasants would not
give that price, and, as Levin suspected, kept oﬀ other purchasers. en Levin
had driven over himself, and arranged to have the grass cut, partly by hired labor, partly at a payment of a certain proportion of the crop. His own peasants
put every hindrance they could in the way of this new arrangement, but it was
carried out, and the ﬁrst year the meadows had yielded a proﬁt almost double.
e previous year—which was the third year—the peasants had maintained the
same opposition to the arrangement, and the hay had been cut on the same system. is year the peasants were doing all the mowing for a third of the hay crop,
and the village elder had come now to announce that the hay had been cut, and
that, fearing rain, they had invited the counting-house clerk over, had divided the
crop in his presence, and had raked together eleven stacks as the owner’s share.

ccxlviii
From the vague answers to his question how much hay had been cut on the principal meadow, from the hurry of the village elder who had made the division, not
asking leave, from the whole tone of the peasant, Levin perceived that there was
something wrong in the division of the hay, and made up his mind to drive over
himself to look into the maer.
Arriving for dinner at the village, and leaving his horse at the coage of
an old friend of his, the husband of his brother’s wet-nurse, Levin went to see
the old man in his bee-house, wanting to ﬁnd out from him the truth about the
hay. Parmenitch, a talkative, comely old man, gave Levin a very warm welcome,
showed him all he was doing, told him everything about his bees and the swarms
of that year; but gave vague and unwilling answers to Levin’s inquiries about
the mowing. is conﬁrmed Levin still more in his suspicions. He went to the
hay ﬁelds and examined the stacks. e haystacks could not possibly contain ﬁy
wagon-loads each, and to convict the peasants Levin ordered the wagons that had
carried the hay to be brought up directly, to li one stack, and carry it into the
barn. ere turned out to be only thirty-two loads in the stack. In spite of the
village elder’s assertions about the compressibility of hay, and its having seled
down in the stacks, and his swearing that everything had been done in the fear
of God, Levin stuck to his point that the hay had been divided without his orders,
and that, therefore, he would not accept that hay as ﬁy loads to a stack. Aer
a prolonged dispute the maer was decided by the peasants taking these eleven
stacks, reckoning them as ﬁy loads each. e arguments and the division of the
haycocks lasted the whole aernoon. When the last of the hay had been divided,
Levin, intrusting the superintendence of the rest to the counting-house clerk, sat
down on a haycock marked oﬀ by a stake of willow, and looked admiringly at the
meadow swarming with peasants.
In front of him, in the bend of the river beyond the marsh, moved a brightcolored line of peasant women, and the scaered hay was being rapidly formed
into gray winding rows over the pale green stubble. Aer the women came the
men with pitchforks, and from the gray rows there were growing up broad, high,
so haycocks. To the le, carts were rumbling over the meadow that had been
already cleared, and one aer another the haycocks vanished, ﬂung up in huge
forkfuls, and in their place there were rising heavy cartloads of fragrant hay hanging over the horses’ hind-quarters.
"What weather for haying! What hay it’ll be!" said an old man, squaing
down beside Levin. "It’s tea, not hay! It’s like scaering grain to the ducks, the
way they pick it up!" he added, pointing to the growing haycocks. "Since dinnertime they’ve carried a good half of it."
"e last load, eh?" he shouted to a young peasant, who drove by, standing
in the front of an empty cart, shaking the cord reins.

ccxlix
"e last, dad!" the lad shouted back, pulling in the horse, and, smiling, he
looked round at a bright, rosy-checked peasant girl who sat in the cart smiling
too, and drove on.
"Who’s that? Your son?" asked Levin.
"My baby," said the old man with a tender smile.
"What a ﬁne fellow!"
"e lad’s all right."
"Married already?"
"Yes, it’s two years last St. Philip’s day."
"Any children?"
"Children indeed! Why, for over a year he was innocent as a babe himself,
and bashful too," answered the old man. "Well, the hay! It’s as fragrant as tea!"
he repeated, wishing to change the subject.
Levin looked more aentively at Ivan Parmenov and his wife. ey were
loading a haycock onto the cart not far from him. Ivan Parmenov was standing
on the cart, taking, laying in place, and stamping down the huge bundles of hay,
which his prey young wife dely handed up to him, at ﬁrst in armfuls, and
then on the pitchfork. e young wife worked easily, merrily, and dexterously.
e close-packed hay did not once break away oﬀ her fork. First she gathered it
together, stuck the fork into it, then with a rapid, supple movement leaned the
whole weight of her body on it, and at once with a bend of her back under the red
belt she drew herself up, and arching her full bosom under the white smock, with
a smart turn swung the fork in her arms, and ﬂung the bundle of hay high onto
the cart. Ivan, obviously doing his best to save her every minute of unnecessary
labor, made haste, opening his arms to clutch the bundle and lay it in the cart.
As she raked together what was le of the hay, the young wife shook oﬀ the bits
of hay that had fallen on her neck, and straightening the red kerchief that had
dropped forward over her white brow, not browned like her face by the sun, she
crept under the cart to tie up the load. Ivan directed her how to fasten the cord to
the cross-piece, and at something she said he laughed aloud. In the expressions
of both faces was to be seen vigorous, young, freshly awakened love.

Chapter 
e load was tied on. Ivan jumped down and took the quiet, sleek horse by the bridle. e young wife ﬂung the rake up on the load, and with a bold step, swinging
her arms, she went to join the women, who were forming a ring for the haymakers’ dance. Ivan drove oﬀ to the road and fell into line with the other loaded carts.
e peasant women, with their rakes on their shoulders, gay with bright ﬂowers,

ccl
and chaering with ringing, merry voices, walked behind the hay cart. One wild
untrained female voice broke into a song, and sang it alone through a verse, and
then the same verse was taken up and repeated by half a hundred strong healthy
voices, of all sorts, coarse and ﬁne, singing in unison.
e women, all singing, began to come close to Levin, and he felt as though
a storm were swooping down upon him with a thunder of merriment. e storm
swooped down, enveloped him and the haycock on which he was lying, and the
other haycocks, and the wagon-loads, and the whole meadow and distant ﬁelds
all seemed to be shaking and singing to the measures of this wild merry song with
its shouts and whistles and clapping. Levin felt envious of this health and mirthfulness; he longed to take part in the expression of this joy of life. But he could
do nothing, and had to lie and look on and listen. When the peasants, with their
singing, had vanished out of sight and hearing, a weary feeling of despondency
at his own isolation, his physical inactivity, his alienation from this world, came
over Levin.
Some of the very peasants who had been most active in wrangling with him
over the hay, some whom he had treated with contumely, and who had tried to
cheat him, those very peasants had greeted him goodhumoredly, and evidently
had not, were incapable of having any feeling of rancor against him, any regret,
any recollection even of having tried to deceive him. All that was drowned in
a sea of merry common labor. God gave the day, God gave the strength. And
the day and the strength were consecrated to labor, and that labor was its own
reward. For whom the labor? What would be its fruits? ese were idle considerations—beside the point.
Oen Levin had admired this life, oen he had a sense of envy of the men
who led this life; but today for the ﬁrst time, especially under the inﬂuence of
what he had seen in the aitude of Ivan Parmenov to his young wife, the idea
presented itself deﬁnitely to his mind that it was in his power to exchange the
dreary, artiﬁcial, idle, and individualistic life he was leading for this laborious,
pure, and socially delightful life.
e old man who had been siing beside him had long ago gone home; the
people had all separated. ose who lived near had gone home, while those who
came from far were gathered into a group for supper, and to spend the night in
the meadow. Levin, unobserved by the peasants, still lay on the haycock, and
still looked on and listened and mused. e peasants who remained for the night
in the meadow scarcely slept all the short summer night. At ﬁrst there was the
sound of merry talk and laughing all together over the supper, then singing again
and laughter.
All the long day of toil had le no trace in them but lightness of heart. Before
the early dawn all was hushed. Nothing was to be heard but the night sounds of

ccli
the frogs that never ceased in the marsh, and the horses snorting in the mist that
rose over the meadow before the morning. Rousing himself, Levin got up from
the haycock, and looking at the stars, he saw that the night was over.
"Well, what am I going to do? How am I to set about it?" he said to himself,
trying to express to himself all the thoughts and feelings he had passed through
in that brief night. All the thoughts and feelings he had passed through fell into
three separate trains of thought. One was the renunciation of his old life, of his
uerly useless education. is renunciation gave him satisfaction, and was easy
and simple. Another series of thoughts and mental images related to the life he
longed to live now. e simplicity, the purity, the sanity of this life he felt clearly,
and he was convinced he would ﬁnd in it the content, the peace, and the dignity,
of the lack of which he was so miserably conscious. But a third series of ideas
turned upon the question how to eﬀect this transition from the old life to the
new. And there nothing took clear shape for him. "Have a wife? Have work and
the necessity of work? Leave Pokrovskoe? Buy land? Become a member of a
peasant community? Marry a peasant girl? How am I to set about it?" he asked
himself again, and could not ﬁnd an answer. "I haven’t slept all night, though,
and I can’t think it out clearly," he said to himself. "I’ll work it out later. One
thing’s certain, this night has decided my fate. All my old dreams of home life
were absurd, not the real thing," he told himself. "It’s all ever so much simpler
and beer…"
"How beautiful!" he thought, looking at the strange, as it were, mother-ofpearl shell of white ﬂeecy cloudlets resting right over his head in the middle of
the sky. "How exquisite it all is in this exquisite night! And when was there
time for that cloud-shell to form? Just now I looked at the sky, and there was
nothing in it—only two white streaks. Yes, and so imperceptibly too my views of
life changed!"
He went out of the meadow and walked along the highroad towards the
village. A slight wind arose, and the sky looked gray and sullen. e gloomy
moment had come that usually precedes the dawn, the full triumph of light over
darkness.
Shrinking from the cold, Levin walked rapidly, looking at the ground.
"What’s that? Someone coming," he thought, catching the tinkle of bells, and liing his head. Forty paces from him a carriage with four horses harnessed abreast
was driving towards him along the grassy road on which he was walking. e
sha-horses were tilted against the shas by the ruts, but the dexterous driver sitting on the box held the sha over the ruts, so that the wheels ran on the smooth
part of the road.
is was all Levin noticed, and without wondering who it could be, he gazed
absently at the coach.

cclii
In the coach was an old lady dozing in one corner, and at the window, evidently only just awake, sat a young girl holding in both hands the ribbons of a
white cap. With a face full of light and thought, full of a subtle, complex inner
life, that was remote from Levin, she was gazing beyond him at the glow of the
sunrise.
At the very instant when this apparition was vanishing, the truthful eyes
glanced at him. She recognized him, and her face lighted up with wondering
delight.
He could not be mistaken. ere were no other eyes like those in the world.
ere was only one creature in the world that could concentrate for him all the
brightness and meaning of life. It was she. It was Kiy. He understood that
she was driving to Ergushovo from the railway station. And everything that had
been stirring Levin during that sleepless night, all the resolutions he had made,
all vanished at once. He recalled with horror his dreams of marrying a peasant
girl. ere only, in the carriage that had crossed over to the other side of the road,
and was rapidly disappearing, there only could he ﬁnd the solution of the riddle
of his life, which had weighed so agonizingly upon him of late.
She did not look out again. e sound of the carriage-springs was no longer
audible, the bells could scarcely be heard. e barking of dogs showed the carriage
had reached the village, and all that was le was the empty ﬁelds all round, the
village in front, and he himself isolated and apart from it all, wandering lonely
along the deserted highroad.
He glanced at the sky, expecting to ﬁnd there the cloud shell he had been
admiring and taking as the symbol of the ideas and feelings of that night. ere
was nothing in the sky in the least like a shell. ere, in the remote heights above,
a mysterious change had been accomplished. ere was no trace of shell, and
there was stretched over fully half the sky an even cover of tiny and ever tinier
cloudlets. e sky had grown blue and bright; and with the same soness, but
with the same remoteness, it met his questioning gaze.
"No," he said to himself, "however good that life of simplicity and toil may
be, I cannot go back to it. I love her."

Chapter 
None but those who were most intimate with Alexey Alexandrovitch knew that,
while on the surface the coldest and most reasonable of men, he had one weakness quite opposed to the general trend of his character. Alexey Alexandrovitch
could not hear or see a child or woman crying without being moved. e sight of
tears threw him into a state of nervous agitation, and he uerly lost all power of

ccliii
reﬂection. e chief secretary of his department and his private secretary were
aware of this, and used to warn women who came with petitions on no account
to give way to tears, if they did not want to ruin their chances. "He will get angry, and will not listen to you," they used to say. And as a fact, in such cases the
emotional disturbance set up in Alexey Alexandrovitch by the sight of tears found
expression in hasty anger. "I can do nothing. Kindly leave the room!" he would
commonly cry in such cases.
When returning from the races Anna had informed him of her relations
with Vronsky, and immediately aerwards had burst into tears, hiding her face in
her hands, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for all the fury aroused in him against her, was
aware at the same time of a rush of that emotional disturbance always produced
in him by tears. Conscious of it, and conscious that any expression of his feelings
at that minute would be out of keeping with the position, he tried to suppress
every manifestation of life in himself, and so neither stirred nor looked at her.
is was what had caused that strange expression of deathlike rigidity in his face
which had so impressed Anna.
When they reached the house he helped her to get out of the carriage, and
making an eﬀort to master himself, took leave of her with his usual urbanity, and
uered that phrase that bound him to nothing; he said that tomorrow he would
let her know his decision.
His wife’s words, conﬁrming his worst suspicions, had sent a cruel pang
to the heart of Alexey Alexandrovitch. at pang was intensiﬁed by the strange
feeling of physical pity for her set up by her tears. But when he was all alone
in the carriage Alexey Alexandrovitch, to his surprise and delight, felt complete
relief both from this pity and from the doubts and agonies of jealousy.
He experienced the sensations of a man who has had a tooth out aer suffering long from toothache. Aer a fearful agony and a sense of something huge,
bigger than the head itself, being torn out of his jaw, the suﬀerer, hardly able to
believe in his own good luck, feels all at once that what has so long poisoned his
existence and enchained his aention, exists no longer, and that he can live and
think again, and take interest in other things besides his tooth. is feeling Alexey
Alexandrovitch was experiencing. e agony had been strange and terrible, but
now it was over; he felt that he could live again and think of something other than
his wife.
"No honor, no heart, no religion; a corrupt woman. I always knew it and
always saw it, though I tried to deceive myself to spare her," he said to himself.
And it actually seemed to him that he always had seen it: he recalled incidents
of their past life, in which he had never seen anything wrong before—now these
incidents proved clearly that she had always been a corrupt woman. "I made a
mistake in linking my life to hers; but there was nothing wrong in my mistake,

ccliv
and so I cannot be unhappy. It’s not I that am to blame," he told himself, "but she.
But I have nothing to do with her. She does not exist for me…"
Everything relating to her and her son, towards whom his sentiments were
as much changed as towards her, ceased to interest him. e only thing that
interested him now was the question of in what way he could best, with most
propriety and comfort for himself, and thus with most justice, extricate himself
from the mud with which she had spaered him in her fall, and then proceed
along his path of active, honorable, and useful existence.
"I cannot be made unhappy by the fact that a contemptible woman has commied a crime. I have only to ﬁnd the best way out of the diﬃcult position in
which she has placed me. And I shall ﬁnd it," he said to himself, frowning more
and more. "I’m not the ﬁrst nor the last." And to say nothing of historical instances dating from the "Fair Helen" of Menelaus, recently revived in the memory
of all, a whole list of contemporary examples of husbands with unfaithful wives in
the highest society rose before Alexey Alexandrovitch’s imagination. "Daryalov,
Poltavsky, Prince Karibanov, Count Paskudin, Dram…. Yes, even Dram, such an
honest, capable fellow … Semyonov, Tchagin, Sigonin," Alexey Alexandrovitch
remembered. "Admiing that a certain quite irrational ridicule falls to the lot of
these men, yet I never saw anything but a misfortune in it, and always felt sympathy for it," Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, though indeed this was not the
fact, and he had never felt sympathy for misfortunes of that kind, but the more
frequently he had heard of instances of unfaithful wives betraying their husbands,
the more highly he had thought of himself. "It is a misfortune which may befall
anyone. And this misfortune has befallen me. e only thing to be done is to
make the best of the position."
And he began passing in review the methods of proceeding of men who had
been in the same position that he was in.
"Daryalov fought a duel…."
e duel had particularly fascinated the thoughts of Alexey Alexandrovitch
in his youth, just because he was physically a coward, and was himself well aware
of the fact. Alexey Alexandrovitch could not without horror contemplate the idea
of a pistol aimed at himself, and had never made use of any weapon in his life.
is horror had in his youth set him pondering on dueling, and picturing himself
in a position in which he would have to expose his life to danger. Having aained
success and an established position in the world, he had long ago forgoen this
feeling; but the habitual bent of feeling reasserted itself, and dread of his own
cowardice proved even now so strong that Alexey Alexandrovitch spent a long
while thinking over the question of dueling in all its aspects, and hugging the idea
of a duel, though he was fully aware beforehand that he would never under any
circumstances ﬁght one.

cclv
"ere’s no doubt our society is still so barbarous (it’s not the same in
England) that very many"—and among these were those whose opinion Alexey
Alexandrovitch particularly valued—"look favorably on the duel; but what result
is aained by it? Suppose I call him out," Alexey Alexandrovitch went on to himself, and vividly picturing the night he would spend aer the challenge, and the
pistol aimed at him, he shuddered, and knew that he never would do it—"suppose
I call him out. Suppose I am taught," he went on musing, "to shoot; I press the
trigger," he said to himself, closing his eyes, "and it turns out I have killed him,"
Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, and he shook his head as though to dispel such silly ideas. "What sense is there in murdering a man in order to deﬁne
one’s relation to a guilty wife and son? I should still just as much have to decide what I ought to do with her. But what is more probable and what would
doubtless occur—I should be killed or wounded. I, the innocent person, should be
the victim—killed or wounded. It’s even more senseless. But apart from that, a
challenge to ﬁght would be an act hardly honest on my side. Don’t I know perfectly well that my friends would never allow me to ﬁght a duel—would never
allow the life of a statesman, needed by Russia, to be exposed to danger? Knowing perfectly well beforehand that the maer would never come to real danger,
it would amount to my simply trying to gain a certain sham reputation by such
a challenge. at would be dishonest, that would be false, that would be deceiving myself and others. A duel is quite irrational, and no one expects it of me.
My aim is simply to safeguard my reputation, which is essential for the uninterrupted pursuit of my public duties." Oﬃcial duties, which had always been of
great consequence in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s eyes, seemed of special importance
to his mind at this moment. Considering and rejecting the duel, Alexey Alexandrovitch turned to divorce—another solution selected by several of the husbands
he remembered. Passing in mental review all the instances he knew of divorces
(there were plenty of them in the very highest society with which he was very
familiar), Alexey Alexandrovitch could not ﬁnd a single example in which the
object of divorce was that which he had in view. In all these instances the husband had practically ceded or sold his unfaithful wife, and the very party which,
being in fault, had not the right to contract a fresh marriage, had formed counterfeit, pseudo-matrimonial ties with a self-styled husband. In his own case, Alexey
Alexandrovitch saw that a legal divorce, that is to say, one in which only the
guilty wife would be repudiated, was impossible of aainment. He saw that the
complex conditions of the life they led made the coarse proofs of his wife’s guilt,
required by the law, out of the question; he saw that a certain reﬁnement in that
life would not admit of such proofs being brought forward, even if he had them,
and that to bring forward such proofs would damage him in the public estimation
more than it would her.

cclvi
An aempt at divorce could lead to nothing but a public scandal, which
would be a perfect godsend to his enemies for calumny and aacks on his high
position in society. His chief object, to deﬁne the position with the least amount
of disturbance possible, would not be aained by divorce either. Moreover, in the
event of divorce, or even of an aempt to obtain a divorce, it was obvious that
the wife broke oﬀ all relations with the husband and threw in her lot with the
lover. And in spite of the complete, as he supposed, contempt and indiﬀerence he
now felt for his wife, at the boom of his heart Alexey Alexandrovitch still had
one feeling le in regard to her—a disinclination to see her free to throw in her
lot with Vronsky, so that her crime would be to her advantage. e mere notion
of this so exasperated Alexey Alexandrovitch, that directly it rose to his mind he
groaned with inward agony, and got up and changed his place in the carriage,
and for a long while aer, he sat with scowling brows, wrapping his numbed and
bony legs in the ﬂeecy rug.
"Apart from formal divorce, One might still do like Karibanov, Paskudin,
and that good fellow Dram—that is, separate from one’s wife," he went on thinking, when he had regained his composure. But this step too presented the same
drawback of public scandal as a divorce, and what was more, a separation, quite
as much as a regular divorce, ﬂung his wife into the arms of Vronsky. "No, it’s
out of the question, out of the question!" he said again, twisting his rug about him
again. "I cannot be unhappy, but neither she nor he ought to be happy."
e feeling of jealousy, which had tortured him during the period of uncertainty, had passed away at the instant when the tooth had been with agony
extracted by his wife’s words. But that feeling had been replaced by another, the
desire, not merely that she should not be triumphant, but that she should get due
punishment for her crime. He did not acknowledge this feeling, but at the boom
of his heart he longed for her to suﬀer for having destroyed his peace of mind—his
honor. And going once again over the conditions inseparable from a duel, a divorce, a separation, and once again rejecting them, Alexey Alexandrovitch felt
convinced that there was only one solution,—to keep her with him, concealing
what had happened from the world, and using every measure in his power to
break oﬀ the intrigue, and still more—though this he did not admit to himself—to
punish her. "I must inform her of my conclusion, that thinking over the terrible
position in which she has placed her family, all other solutions will be worse for
both sides than an external status quo, and that such I agree to retain, on the strict
condition of obedience on her part to my wishes, that is to say, cessation of all
intercourse with her lover." When this decision had been ﬁnally adopted, another
weighty consideration occurred to Alexey Alexandrovitch in support of it. "By
such a course only shall I be acting in accordance with the dictates of religion,"
he told himself. "In adopting this course, I am not casting oﬀ a guilty wife, but

cclvii
giving her a chance of amendment; and, indeed, diﬃcult as the task will be to me,
I shall devote part of my energies to her reformation and salvation."
ough Alexey Alexandrovitch was perfectly aware that he could not exert
any moral inﬂuence over his wife, that such an aempt at reformation could lead
to nothing but falsity; though in passing through these diﬃcult moments he had
not once thought of seeking guidance in religion, yet now, when his conclusion
corresponded, as it seemed to him, with the requirements of religion, this religious sanction to his decision gave him complete satisfaction, and to some extent
restored his peace of mind. He was pleased to think that, even in such an important crisis in life, no one would be able to say that he had not acted in accordance
with the principles of that religion whose banner he had always held alo amid
the general coolness and indiﬀerence. As he pondered over subsequent developments, Alexey Alexandrovitch did not see, indeed, why his relations with his
wife should not remain practically the same as before. No doubt, she could never
regain his esteem, but there was not, and there could not be, any sort of reason
that his existence should be troubled, and that he should suﬀer because she was
a bad and faithless wife. "Yes, time will pass; time, which arranges all things, and
the old relations will be reestablished," Alexey Alexandrovitch told himself; "so
far reestablished, that is, that I shall not be sensible of a break in the continuity
of my life. She is bound to be unhappy, but I am not to blame, and so I cannot be
unhappy."

Chapter 
As he neared Petersburg, Alexey Alexandrovitch not only adhered entirely to his
decision, but was even composing in his head the leer he would write to his wife.
Going into the porter’s room, Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at the leers and
papers brought from his oﬃce, and directed that they should be brought to him
in his study.
"e horses can be taken out and I will see no one," he said in answer to the
porter, with a certain pleasure, indicative of his agreeable frame of mind, emphasizing the words, "see no one."
In his study Alexey Alexandrovitch walked up and down twice, and stopped
at an immense writing-table, on which six candles had already been lighted by the
valet who had preceded him. He cracked his knuckles and sat down, sorting out
his writing appurtenances. Puing his elbows on the table, he bent his head on
one side, thought a minute, and began to write, without pausing for a second. He
wrote without using any form of address to her, and wrote in French, making use
of the plural "vous," which has not the same note of coldness as the corresponding

cclviii
Russian form.
"At our last conversation, I notiﬁed you of my intention to communicate to you my decision in regard to the subject of that conversation.
Having carefully considered everything, I am writing now with the
object of fulﬁlling that promise. My decision is as follows. Whatever your conduct may have been, I do not consider myself justiﬁed
in breaking the ties in which we are bound by a Higher Power. e
family cannot be broken up by a whim, a caprice, or even by the sin of
one of the partners in the marriage, and our life must go on as it has
done in the past. is is essential for me, for you, and for our son. I
am fully persuaded that you have repented and do repent of what has
called forth the present leer, and that you will cooperate with me
in eradicating the cause of our estrangement, and forgeing the past.
In the contrary event, you can conjecture what awaits you and your
son. All this I hope to discuss more in detail in a personal interview.
As the season is drawing to a close, I would beg you to return to Petersburg as quickly as possible, not later than Tuesday. All necessary
preparations shall be made for your arrival here. I beg you to note
that I aach particular signiﬁcance to compliance with this request.
A. Karenin
"P.S.—I enclose the money which may be needed for your expenses."
He read the leer through and felt pleased with it, and especially that he had
remembered to enclose money: there was not a harsh word, not a reproach in it,
nor was there undue indulgence. Most of all, it was a golden bridge for return.
Folding the leer and smoothing it with a massive ivory knife, and puing it in an
envelope with the money, he rang the bell with the gratiﬁcation it always aﬀorded
him to use the well arranged appointments of his writing-table.
"Give this to the courier to be delivered to Anna Arkadyevna tomorrow at
the summer villa," he said, geing up.
"Certainly, your excellency; tea to be served in the study?"
Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered tea to be brought to the study, and playing
with the massive paper-knife, he moved to his easy chair, near which there had
been placed ready for him a lamp and the French work on Egyptian hieroglyphics
that he had begun. Over the easy chair there hung in a gold frame an oval portrait
of Anna, a ﬁne painting by a celebrated artist. Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at
it. e unfathomable eyes gazed ironically and insolently at him. Insuﬀerably
insolent and challenging was the eﬀect in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s eyes of the

cclix
black lace about the head, admirably touched in by the painter, the black hair and
handsome white hand with one ﬁnger lied, covered with rings. Aer looking at
the portrait for a minute, Alexey Alexandrovitch shuddered so that his lips quivered and he uered the sound "brrr," and turned away. He made haste to sit down
in his easy chair and opened the book. He tried to read, but he could not revive
the very vivid interest he had felt before in Egyptian hieroglyphics. He looked
at the book and thought of something else. He thought not of his wife, but of a
complication that had arisen in his oﬃcial life, which at the time constituted the
chief interest of it. He felt that he had penetrated more deeply than ever before
into this intricate aﬀair, and that he had originated a leading idea—he could say
it without self-ﬂaery—calculated to clear up the whole business, to strengthen
him in his oﬃcial career, to discomﬁt his enemies, and thereby to be of the greatest beneﬁt to the government. Directly the servant had set the tea and le the
room, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up and went to the writing-table. Moving into
the middle of the table a portfolio of papers, with a scarcely perceptible smile of
self-satisfaction, he took a pencil from a rack and plunged into the perusal of a
complex report relating to the present complication. e complication was of this
nature: Alexey Alexandrovitch’s characteristic quality as a politician, that special
individual qualiﬁcation that every rising functionary possesses, the qualiﬁcation
that with his unﬂagging ambition, his reserve, his honesty, and with his selfconﬁdence had made his career, was his contempt for red tape, his cuing down
of correspondence, his direct contact, wherever possible, with the living fact, and
his economy. It happened that the famous Commission of the nd of June had set
on foot an inquiry into the irrigation of lands in the Zaraisky province, which fell
under Alexey Alexandrovitch’s department, and was a glaring example of fruitless
expenditure and paper reforms. Alexey Alexandrovitch was aware of the truth of
this. e irrigation of these lands in the Zaraisky province had been initiated by
the predecessor of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s predecessor. And vast sums of money
had actually been spent and were still being spent on this business, and uerly unproductively, and the whole business could obviously lead to nothing whatever.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had perceived this at once on entering oﬃce, and would
have liked to lay hands on the Board of Irrigation. But at ﬁrst, when he did not yet
feel secure in his position, he knew it would aﬀect too many interests, and would
be injudicious. Later on he had been engrossed in other questions, and had simply forgoen the Board of Irrigation. It went of itself, like all such boards, by the
mere force of inertia. (Many people gained their livelihood by the Board of Irrigation, especially one highly conscientious and musical family: all the daughters
played on stringed instruments, and Alexey Alexandrovitch knew the family and
had stood godfather to one of the elder daughters.) e raising of this question
by a hostile department was in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s opinion a dishonorable

cclx
proceeding, seeing that in every department there were things similar and worse,
which no one inquired into, for well-known reasons of oﬃcial etiquee. However, now that the glove had been thrown down to him, he had boldly picked it up
and demanded the appointment of a special commission to investigate and verify the working of the Board of Irrigation of the lands in the Zaraisky province.
But in compensation he gave no quarter to the enemy either. He demanded the
appointment of another special commission to inquire into the question of the
Native Tribes Organization Commiee. e question of the Native Tribes had
been brought up incidentally in the Commission of the nd of June, and had been
pressed forward actively by Alexey Alexandrovitch as one admiing of no delay
on account of the deplorable condition of the native tribes. In the commission
this question had been a ground of contention between several departments. e
department hostile to Alexey Alexandrovitch proved that the condition of the native tribes was exceedingly ﬂourishing, that the proposed reconstruction might
be the ruin of their prosperity, and that if there were anything wrong, it arose
mainly from the failure on the part of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s department to
carry out the measures prescribed by law. Now Alexey Alexandrovitch intended
to demand: First, that a new commission should be formed which should be empowered to investigate the condition of the native tribes on the spot; secondly,
if it should appear that the condition of the native tribes actually was such as it
appeared to be from the oﬃcial documents in the hands of the commiee, that another new scientiﬁc commission should be appointed to investigate the deplorable
condition of the native tribes from the—() political, () administrative, () economic, () ethnographical, () material, and () religious points of view; thirdly,
that evidence should be required from the rival department of the measures that
had been taken during the last ten years by that department for averting the disastrous conditions in which the native tribes were now placed; and fourthly and
ﬁnally, that that department explain why it had, as appeared from the evidence
before the commiee, from No. , and ,, from December , , and
June , , acted in direct contravention of the intent of the law T… Act ,
and the note to Act . A ﬂash of eagerness suﬀused the face of Alexey Alexandrovitch as he rapidly wrote out a synopsis of these ideas for his own beneﬁt.
Having ﬁlled a sheet of paper, he got up, rang, and sent a note to the chief secretary of his department to look up certain necessary facts for him. Geing up and
walking about the room, he glanced again at the portrait, frowned, and smiled
contemptuously. Aer reading a lile more of the book on Egyptian hieroglyphics, and renewing his interest in it, Alexey Alexandrovitch went to bed at eleven
o’clock, and recollecting as he lay in bed the incident with his wife, he saw it now
in by no means such a gloomy light.

cclxi

Chapter 
ough Anna had obstinately and with exasperation contradicted Vronsky when
he told her their position was impossible, at the boom of her heart she regarded
her own position as false and dishonorable, and she longed with her whole soul
to change it. On the way home from the races she had told her husband the truth
in a moment of excitement, and in spite of the agony she had suﬀered in doing
so, she was glad of it. Aer her husband had le her, she told herself that she was
glad, that now everything was made clear, and at least there would be no more
lying and deception. It seemed to her beyond doubt that her position was now
made clear forever. It might be bad, this new position, but it would be clear; there
would be no indeﬁniteness or falsehood about it. e pain she had caused herself
and her husband in uering those words would be rewarded now by everything
being made clear, she thought. at evening she saw Vronsky, but she did not
tell him of what had passed between her and her husband, though, to make the
position deﬁnite, it was necessary to tell him.
When she woke up next morning the ﬁrst thing that rose to her mind was
what she had said to her husband, and those words seemed to her so awful that
she could not conceive now how she could have brought herself to uer those
strange, coarse words, and could not imagine what would come of it. But the
words were spoken, and Alexey Alexandrovitch had gone away without saying
anything. "I saw Vronsky and did not tell him. At the very instant he was going
away I would have turned him back and told him, but I changed my mind, because
it was strange that I had not told him the ﬁrst minute. Why was it I wanted to
tell him and did not tell him?" And in answer to this question a burning blush
of shame spread over her face. She knew what had kept her from it, she knew
that she had been ashamed. Her position, which had seemed to her simpliﬁed the
night before, suddenly struck her now as not only not simple, but as absolutely
hopeless. She felt terriﬁed at the disgrace, of which she had not ever thought
before. Directly she thought of what her husband would do, the most terrible
ideas came to her mind. She had a vision of being turned out of the house, of her
shame being proclaimed to all the world. She asked herself where she should go
when she was turned out of the house, and she could not ﬁnd an answer.
When she thought of Vronsky, it seemed to her that he did not love her, that
he was already beginning to be tired of her, that she could not oﬀer herself to him,
and she felt bier against him for it. It seemed to her that the words that she had
spoken to her husband, and had continually repeated in her imagination, she had
said to everyone, and everyone had heard them. She could not bring herself to
look those of her own household in the face. She could not bring herself to call
her maid, and still less go downstairs and see her son and his governess.

cclxii
e maid, who had been listening at her door for a long while, came into
her room of her own accord. Anna glanced inquiringly into her face, and blushed
with a scared look. e maid begged her pardon for coming in, saying that she
had fancied the bell rang. She brought her clothes and a note. e note was
from Betsy. Betsy reminded her that Liza Merkalova and Baroness Shtoltz were
coming to play croquet with her that morning with their adorers, Kaluzhsky and
old Stremov. "Come, if only as a study in morals. I shall expect you," she ﬁnished.
Anna read the note and heaved a deep sigh.
"Nothing, I need nothing," she said to Annushka, who was rearranging the
boles and brushes on the dressing table. "You can go. I’ll dress at once and come
down. I need nothing."
Annushka went out, but Anna did not begin dressing, and sat in the same
position, her head and hands hanging listlessly, and every now and then she shivered all over, seemed as though she would make some gesture, uer some word,
and sank back into lifelessness again. She repeated continually, "My God! my
God!" But neither "God" nor "my" had any meaning to her. e idea of seeking
help in her diﬃculty in religion was as remote from her as seeking help from
Alexey Alexandrovitch himself, although she had never had doubts of the faith in
which she had been brought up. She knew that the support of religion was possible only upon condition of renouncing what made up for her the whole meaning
of life. She was not simply miserable, she began to feel alarm at the new spiritual condition, never experienced before, in which she found herself. She felt as
though everything were beginning to be double in her soul, just as objects sometimes appear double to over-tired eyes. She hardly knew at times what it was she
feared, and what she hoped for. Whether she feared or desired what had happened, or what was going to happen, and exactly what she longed for, she could
not have said.
"Ah, what am I doing!" she said to herself, feeling a sudden thrill of pain in
both sides of her head. When she came to herself, she saw that she was holding
her hair in both hands, each side of her temples, and pulling it. She jumped up,
and began walking about.
"e coﬀee is ready, and mademoiselle and Seryozha are waiting," said Annushka, coming back again and ﬁnding Anna in the same position.
"Seryozha? What about Seryozha?" Anna asked, with sudden eagerness,
recollecting her son’s existence for the ﬁrst time that morning.
"He’s been naughty, I think," answered Annushka with a smile.
"In what way?"
"Some peaches were lying on the table in the corner room. I think he slipped
in and ate one of them on the sly."
e recollection of her son suddenly roused Anna from the helpless condi-

cclxiii
tion in which she found herself. She recalled the partly sincere, though greatly
exaggerated, rôle of the mother living for her child, which she had taken up of
late years, and she felt with joy that in the plight in which she found herself she
had a support, quite apart from her relation to her husband or to Vronsky. is
support was her son. In whatever position she might be placed, she could not lose
her son. Her husband might put her to shame and turn her out, Vronsky might
grow cold to her and go on living his own life apart (she thought of him again
with bierness and reproach); she could not leave her son. She had an aim in
life. And she must act; act to secure this relation to her son, so that he might not
be taken from her. ickly indeed, as quickly as possible, she must take action
before he was taken from her. She must take her son and go away. Here was the
one thing she had to do now. She needed consolation. She must be calm, and get
out of this insuﬀerable position. e thought of immediate action binding her to
her son, of going away somewhere with him, gave her this consolation.
She dressed quickly, went downstairs, and with resolute steps walked into
the drawing room, where she found, as usual, waiting for her, the coﬀee, Seryozha, and his governess. Seryozha, all in white, with his back and head bent, was
standing at a table under a looking-glass, and with an expression of intense concentration which she knew well, and in which he resembled his father, he was
doing something to the ﬂowers he carried.
e governess had a particularly severe expression. Seryozha screamed
shrilly, as he oen did, "Ah, mamma!" and stopped, hesitating whether to go to
greet his mother and put down the ﬂowers, or to ﬁnish making the wreath and
go with the ﬂowers.
e governess, aer saying good-morning, began a long and detailed account of Seryozha’s naughtiness, but Anna did not hear her; she was considering
whether she would take her with her or not. "No, I won’t take her," she decided.
"I’ll go alone with my child."
"Yes, it’s very wrong," said Anna, and taking her son by the shoulder she
looked at him, not severely, but with a timid glance that bewildered and delighted
the boy, and she kissed him. "Leave him to me," she said to the astonished governess, and not leing go of her son, she sat down at the table, where coﬀee was
set ready for her.
"Mamma! I … I … didn’t…" he said, trying to make out from her expression
what was in store for him in regard to the peaches.
"Seryozha," she said, as soon as the governess had le the room, "that was
wrong, but you’ll never do it again, will you?… You love me?"
She felt that the tears were coming into her eyes. "Can I help loving him?"
she said to herself, looking deeply into his scared and at the same time delighted
eyes. "And can he ever join his father in punishing me? Is it possible he will not

cclxiv
feel for me?" Tears were already ﬂowing down her face, and to hide them she got
up abruptly and almost ran out on to the terrace.
Aer the thunder showers of the last few days, cold, bright weather had set
in. e air was cold in the bright sun that ﬁltered through the freshly washed
leaves.
She shivered, both from the cold and from the inward horror which had
clutched her with fresh force in the open air.
"Run along, run along to Mariee," she said to Seryozha, who had followed
her out, and she began walking up and down on the straw maing of the terrace.
"Can it be that they won’t forgive me, won’t understand how it all couldn’t be
helped?" she said to herself.
Standing still, and looking at the tops of the aspen trees waving in the wind,
with their freshly washed, brightly shining leaves in the cold sunshine, she knew
that they would not forgive her, that everyone and everything would be merciless
to her now as was that sky, that green. And again she felt that everything was
split in two in her soul. "I mustn’t, mustn’t think," she said to herself. "I must
get ready. To go where? When? Whom to take with me? Yes, to Moscow by
the evening train. Annushka and Seryozha, and only the most necessary things.
But ﬁrst I must write to them both." She went quickly indoors into her boudoir,
sat down at the table, and wrote to her husband:—"Aer what has happened, I
cannot remain any longer in your house. I am going away, and taking my son
with me. I don’t know the law, and so I don’t know with which of the parents the
son should remain; but I take him with me because I cannot live without him. Be
generous, leave him to me."
Up to this point she wrote rapidly and naturally, but the appeal to his generosity, a quality she did not recognize in him, and the necessity of winding up
the leer with something touching, pulled her up. "Of my fault and my remorse
I cannot speak, because…"
She stopped again, ﬁnding no connection in her ideas. "No," she said to
herself, "there’s no need of anything," and tearing up the leer, she wrote it again,
leaving out the allusion to generosity, and sealed it up.
Another leer had to be wrien to Vronsky. "I have told my husband," she
wrote, and she sat a long while unable to write more. It was so coarse, so unfeminine. "And what more am I to write to him?" she said to herself. Again a ﬂush
of shame spread over her face; she recalled his composure, and a feeling of anger
against him impelled her to tear the sheet with the phrase she had wrien into
tiny bits. "No need of anything," she said to herself, and closing her bloing-case
she went upstairs, told the governess and the servants that she was going that day
to Moscow, and at once set to work to pack up her things.

cclxv

Chapter 
All the rooms of the summer villa were full of porters, gardeners, and footmen
going to and fro carrying out things. Cupboards and chests were open; twice
they had sent to the shop for cord; pieces of newspaper were tossing about on
the ﬂoor. Two trunks, some bags and strapped-up rugs, had been carried down
into the hall. e carriage and two hired cabs were waiting at the steps. Anna,
forgeing her inward agitation in the work of packing, was standing at a table
in her boudoir, packing her traveling bag, when Annushka called her aention to
the rale of some carriage driving up. Anna looked out of the window and saw
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s courier on the steps, ringing at the front door bell.
"Run and ﬁnd out what it is," she said, and with a calm sense of being prepared for anything, she sat down in a low chair, folding her hands on her knees.
A footman brought in a thick packet directed in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s hand.
"e courier has orders to wait for an answer," he said.
"Very well," she said, and as soon as he had le the room she tore open the
leer with trembling ﬁngers. A roll of unfolded notes done up in a wrapper fell out
of it. She disengaged the leer and began reading it at the end. "Preparations shall
be made for your arrival here … I aach particular signiﬁcance to compliance…"
she read. She ran on, then back, read it all through, and once more read the leer
all through again from the beginning. When she had ﬁnished, she felt that she
was cold all over, and that a fearful calamity, such as she had not expected, had
burst upon her.
In the morning she had regreed that she had spoken to her husband, and
wished for nothing so much as that those words could be unspoken. And here this
leer regarded them as unspoken, and gave her what she had wanted. But now
this leer seemed to her more awful than anything she had been able to conceive.
"He’s right!" she said; "of course, he’s always right; he’s a Christian, he’s
generous! Yes, vile, base creature! And no one understands it except me, and no
one ever will; and I can’t explain it. ey say he’s so religious, so high-principled,
so upright, so clever; but they don’t see what I’ve seen. ey don’t know how he
has crushed my life for eight years, crushed everything that was living in me—he
has not once even thought that I’m a live woman who must have love. ey don’t
know how at every step he’s humiliated me, and been just as pleased with himself.
Haven’t I striven, striven with all my strength, to ﬁnd something to give meaning
to my life? Haven’t I struggled to love him, to love my son when I could not love
my husband? But the time came when I knew that I couldn’t cheat myself any
longer, that I was alive, that I was not to blame, that God has made me so that I
must love and live. And now what does he do? If he’d killed me, if he’d killed him,
I could have borne anything, I could have forgiven anything; but, no, he…. How

cclxvi
was it I didn’t guess what he would do? He’s doing just what’s characteristic of
his mean character. He’ll keep himself in the right, while me, in my ruin, he’ll
drive still lower to worse ruin yet…."
She recalled the words from the leer. "You can conjecture what awaits you
and your son…." "at’s a threat to take away my child, and most likely by their
stupid law he can. But I know very well why he says it. He doesn’t believe even
in my love for my child, or he despises it (just as he always used to ridicule it).
He despises that feeling in me, but he knows that I won’t abandon my child, that I
can’t abandon my child, that there could be no life for me without my child, even
with him whom I love; but that if I abandoned my child and ran away from him,
I should be acting like the most infamous, basest of women. He knows that, and
knows that I am incapable of doing that."
She recalled another sentence in the leer. "Our life must go on as it has
done in the past…." "at life was miserable enough in the old days; it has been
awful of late. What will it be now? And he knows all that; he knows that I can’t
repent that I breathe, that I love; he knows that it can lead to nothing but lying
and deceit; but he wants to go on torturing me. I know him; I know that he’s at
home and is happy in deceit, like a ﬁsh swimming in the water. No, I won’t give
him that happiness. I’ll break through the spiderweb of lies in which he wants to
catch me, come what may. Anything’s beer than lying and deceit.
"But how? My God! my God! Was ever a woman so miserable as I am?…"
"No; I will break through it, I will break through it!" she cried, jumping
up and keeping back her tears. And she went to the writing table to write him
another leer. But at the boom of her heart she felt that she was not strong
enough to break through anything, that she was not strong enough to get out of
her old position, however false and dishonorable it might be.
She sat down at the writing table, but instead of writing she clasped her
hands on the table, and, laying her head on them, burst into tears, with sobs and
heaving breast like a child crying. She was weeping that her dream of her position
being made clear and deﬁnite had been annihilated forever. She knew beforehand
that everything would go on in the old way, and far worse, indeed, than in the old
way. She felt that the position in the world that she enjoyed, and that had seemed
to her of so lile consequence in the morning, that this position was precious to
her, that she would not have the strength to exchange it for the shameful position
of a woman who has abandoned husband and child to join her lover; that however
much she might struggle, she could not be stronger than herself. She would never
know freedom in love, but would remain forever a guilty wife, with the menace of
detection hanging over her at every instant; deceiving her husband for the sake
of a shameful connection with a man living apart and away from her, whose life
she could never share. She knew that this was how it would be, and at the same

cclxvii
time it was so awful that she could not even conceive what it would end in. And
she cried without restraint, as children cry when they are punished.
e sound of the footman’s steps forced her to rouse herself, and, hiding
her face from him, she pretended to be writing.
"e courier asks if there’s an answer," the footman announced.
"An answer? Yes," said Anna. "Let him wait. I’ll ring."
"What can I write?" she thought. "What can I decide upon alone? What
do I know? What do I want? What is there I care for?" Again she felt that her
soul was beginning to be split in two. She was terriﬁed again at this feeling, and
clutched at the ﬁrst pretext for doing something which might divert her thoughts
from herself. "I ought to see Alexey" (so she called Vronsky in her thoughts); "no
one but he can tell me what I ought to do. I’ll go to Betsy’s, perhaps I shall see
him there," she said to herself, completely forgeing that when she had told him
the day before that she was not going to Princess Tverskaya’s, he had said that in
that case he should not go either. She went up to the table, wrote to her husband,
"I have received your leer.—A."; and, ringing the bell, gave it to the footman.
"We are not going," she said to Annushka, as she came in.
"Not going at all?"
"No; don’t unpack till tomorrow, and let the carriage wait. I’m going to the
princess’s."
"Which dress am I to get ready?"

Chapter 
e croquet party to which the Princess Tverskaya had invited Anna was to consist of two ladies and their adorers. ese two ladies were the chief representatives of a select new Petersburg circle, nicknamed, in imitation of some imitation, les sept merveilles du monde. ese ladies belonged to a circle which, though
of the highest society, was uerly hostile to that in which Anna moved. Moreover, Stremov, one of the most inﬂuential people in Petersburg, and the elderly
admirer of Liza Merkalova, was Alexey Alexandrovitch’s enemy in the political
world. From all these considerations Anna had not meant to go, and the hints in
Princess Tverskaya’s note referred to her refusal. But now Anna was eager to go,
in the hope of seeing Vronsky.
Anna arrived at Princess Tverskaya’s earlier than the other guests.
At the same moment as she entered, Vronsky’s footman, with side-whiskers
combed out like a Kammerjunker, went in too. He stopped at the door, and, taking
oﬀ his cap, let her pass. Anna recognized him, and only then recalled that Vronsky
had told her the day before that he would not come. Most likely he was sending

cclxviii
a note to say so.
As she took oﬀ her outer garment in the hall, she heard the footman, pronouncing his "r’s" even like a Kammerjunker, say, "From the count for the princess,"
and hand the note.
She longed to question him as to where his master was. She longed to turn
back and send him a leer to come and see her, or to go herself to see him. But
neither the ﬁrst nor the second nor the third course was possible. Already she
heard bells ringing to announce her arrival ahead of her, and Princess Tverskaya’s
footman was standing at the open door waiting for her to go forward into the
inner rooms.
"e princess is in the garden; they will inform her immediately. Would
you be pleased to walk into the garden?" announced another footman in another
room.
e position of uncertainty, of indecision, was still the same as at
home—worse, in fact, since it was impossible to take any step, impossible to see
Vronsky, and she had to remain here among outsiders, in company so uncongenial
to her present mood. But she was wearing a dress that she knew suited her. She
was not alone; all around was that luxurious seing of idleness that she was used
to, and she felt less wretched than at home. She was not forced to think what she
was to do. Everything would be done of itself. On meeting Betsy coming towards
her in a white gown that struck her by its elegance, Anna smiled at her just as she
always did. Princess Tverskaya was walking with Tushkevitch and a young lady,
a relation, who, to the great joy of her parents in the provinces, was spending the
summer with the fashionable princess.
ere was probably something unusual about Anna, for Betsy noticed it at
once.
"I slept badly," answered Anna, looking intently at the footman who came
to meet them, and, as she supposed, brought Vronsky’s note.
"How glad I am you’ve come!" said Betsy. "I’m tired, and was just longing to
have some tea before they come. You might go"—she turned to Tushkevitch—"with
Masha, and try the croquet ground over there where they’ve been cuing it. We
shall have time to talk a lile over tea; we’ll have a cozy chat, eh?" she said in
English to Anna, with a smile, pressing the hand with which she held a parasol.
"Yes, especially as I can’t stay very long with you. I’m forced to go on to
old Madame Vrede. I’ve been promising to go for a century," said Anna, to whom
lying, alien as it was to her nature, had become not merely simple and natural
in society, but a positive source of satisfaction. Why she said this, which she
had not thought of a second before, she could not have explained. She had said
it simply from the reﬂection that as Vronsky would not be here, she had beer
secure her own freedom, and try to see him somehow. But why she had spoken

cclxix
of old Madame Vrede, whom she had to go and see, as she had to see many other
people, she could not have explained; and yet, as it aerwards turned out, had
she contrived the most cunning devices to meet Vronsky, she could have thought
of nothing beer.
"No. I’m not going to let you go for anything," answered Betsy, looking
intently into Anna’s face. "Really, if I were not fond of you, I should feel oﬀended.
One would think you were afraid my society would compromise you. Tea in the
lile dining room, please," she said, half closing her eyes, as she always did when
addressing the footman.
Taking the note from him, she read it.
"Alexey’s playing us false," she said in French; "he writes that he can’t come,"
she added in a tone as simple and natural as though it could never enter her head
that Vronsky could mean anything more to Anna than a game of croquet. Anna
knew that Betsy knew everything, but, hearing how she spoke of Vronsky before
her, she almost felt persuaded for a minute that she knew nothing.
"Ah!" said Anna indiﬀerently, as though not greatly interested in the maer,
and she went on smiling: "How can you or your friends compromise anyone?"
is playing with words, this hiding of a secret, had a great fascination for
Anna, as, indeed, it has for all women. And it was not the necessity of concealment, not the aim with which the concealment was contrived, but the process of
concealment itself which aracted her.
"I can’t be more Catholic than the Pope," she said. "Stremov and Liza
Merkalova, why, they’re the cream of the cream of society. Besides, they’re received everywhere, and I"—she laid special stress on the I—"have never been strict
and intolerant. It’s simply that I haven’t the time."
"No; you don’t care, perhaps, to meet Stremov? Let him and Alexey Alexandrovitch tilt at each other in the commiee—that’s no aﬀair of ours. But in the
world, he’s the most amiable man I know, and a devoted croquet player. You
shall see. And, in spite of his absurd position as Liza’s lovesick swain at his age,
you ought to see how he carries oﬀ the absurd position. He’s very nice. Sappho
Shtoltz you don’t know? Oh, that’s a new type, quite new."
Betsy said all this, and, at the same time, from her good-humored, shrewd
glance, Anna felt that she partly guessed her plight, and was hatching something
for her beneﬁt. ey were in the lile boudoir.
"I must write to Alexey though," and Betsy sat down to the table, scribbled
a few lines, and put the note in an envelope.
"I’m telling him to come to dinner. I’ve one lady extra to dinner with me,
and no man to take her in. Look what I’ve said, will that persuade him? Excuse
me, I must leave you for a minute. Would you seal it up, please, and send it o?"
she said from the door; "I have to give some directions."

cclxx
Without a moment’s thought, Anna sat down to the table with Betsy’s leer,
and, without reading it, wrote below: "It’s essential for me to see you. Come to the
Vrede garden. I shall be there at six o’clock." She sealed it up, and, Betsy coming
back, in her presence handed the note to be taken.
At tea, which was brought them on a lile tea-table in the cool lile drawing
room, the cozy chat promised by Princess Tverskaya before the arrival of her
visitors really did come oﬀ between the two women. ey criticized the people
they were expecting, and the conversation fell upon Liza Merkalova.
"She’s very sweet, and I always liked her," said Anna.
"You ought to like her. She raves about you. Yesterday she came up to me
aer the races and was in despair at not ﬁnding you. She says you’re a real heroine
of romance, and that if she were a man she would do all sorts of mad things for
your sake. Stremov says she does that as it is."
"But do tell me, please, I never could make it out," said Anna, aer being
silent for some time, speaking in a tone that showed she was not asking an idle
question, but that what she was asking was of more importance to her than it
should have been; "do tell me, please, what are her relations with Prince Kaluzhsky, Mishka, as he’s called? I’ve met them so lile. What does it mean?"
Betsy smiled with her eyes, and looked intently at Anna.
"It’s a new manner," she said. "ey’ve all adopted that manner. ey’ve
ﬂung their caps over the windmills. But there are ways and ways of ﬂinging
them."
"Yes, but what are her relations precisely with Kaluzhsky?"
Betsy broke into unexpectedly mirthful and irrepressible laughter, a thing
which rarely happened with her.
"You’re encroaching on Princess Myakaya’s special domain now. at’s the
question of an enfant terrible," and Betsy obviously tried to restrain herself, but
could not, and went oﬀ into peals of that infectious laughter that people laugh
who do not laugh oen. "You’d beer ask them," she brought out, between tears
of laughter.
"No; you laugh," said Anna, laughing too in spite of herself, "but I never
could understand it. I can’t understand the husband’s rôle in it."
"e husband? Liza Merkalova’s husband carries her shawl, and is always
ready to be of use. But anything more than that in reality, no one cares to inquire.
You know in decent society one doesn’t talk or think even of certain details of the
toilet. at’s how it is with this."
"Will you be at Madame Rolandak’s fête?" asked Anna, to change the conversation.
"I don’t think so," answered Betsy, and, without looking at her friend, she
began ﬁlling the lile transparent cups with fragrant tea. Puing a cup before

cclxxi
Anna, she took out a cigaree, and, ﬁing it into a silver holder, she lighted it.
"It’s like this, you see: I’m in a fortunate position," she began, quite serious
now, as she took up her cup. "I understand you, and I understand Liza. Liza now is
one of those naïve natures that, like children, don’t know what’s good and what’s
bad. Anyway, she didn’t comprehend it when she was very young. And now she’s
aware that the lack of comprehension suits her. Now, perhaps, she doesn’t know
on purpose," said Betsy, with a subtle smile. "But, anyway, it suits her. e very
same thing, don’t you see, may be looked at tragically, and turned into a misery,
or it may be looked at simply and even humorously. Possibly you are inclined to
look at things too tragically."
"How I should like to know other people just as I know myself!" said Anna,
seriously and dreamily. "Am I worse than other people, or beer? I think I’m
worse."
"Enfant terrible, enfant terrible!" repeated Betsy. "But here they are."

Chapter 
ey heard the sound of steps and a man’s voice, then a woman’s voice and
laughter, and immediately thereaer there walked in the expected guests: Sappho
Shtoltz, and a young man beaming with excess of health, the so-called Vaska. It
was evident that ample supplies of beefsteak, truﬄes, and Burgundy never failed
to reach him at the ﬁing hour. Vaska bowed to the two ladies, and glanced at
them, but only for one second. He walked aer Sappho into the drawing-room,
and followed her about as though he were chained to her, keeping his sparkling
eyes ﬁxed on her as though he wanted to eat her. Sappho Shtoltz was a blonde
beauty with black eyes. She walked with smart lile steps in high-heeled shoes,
and shook hands with the ladies vigorously like a man.
Anna had never met this new star of fashion, and was struck by her beauty,
the exaggerated extreme to which her dress was carried, and the boldness of her
manners. On her head there was such a superstructure of so, golden hair—her
own and false mixed—that her head was equal in size to the elegantly rounded
bust, of which so much was exposed in front. e impulsive abruptness of her
movements was such that at every step the lines of her knees and the upper part
of her legs were distinctly marked under her dress, and the question involuntarily
rose to the mind where in the undulating, piled-up mountain of material at the
back the real body of the woman, so small and slender, so naked in front, and so
hidden behind and below, really came to an end.
Betsy made haste to introduce her to Anna.
"Only fancy, we all but ran over two soldiers," she began telling them at

cclxxii
once, using her eyes, smiling and twitching away her tail, which she ﬂung back
at one stroke all on one side. "I drove here with Vaska…. Ah, to be sure, you don’t
know each other." And mentioning his surname she introduced the young man,
and reddening a lile, broke into a ringing laugh at her mistake—that is, at her
having called him Vaska to a stranger. Vaska bowed once more to Anna, but he
said nothing to her. He addressed Sappho: "You’ve lost your bet. We got here
ﬁrst. Pay up," said he, smiling.
Sappho laughed still more festively.
"Not just now," said she.
"Oh, all right, I’ll have it later."
"Very well, very well. Oh, yes." She turned suddenly to Princess Betsy: "I
am a nice person … I positively forgot it … I’ve brought you a visitor. And here
he comes." e unexpected young visitor, whom Sappho had invited, and whom
she had forgoen, was, however, a personage of such consequence that, in spite
of his youth, both the ladies rose on his entrance.
He was a new admirer of Sappho’s. He now dogged her footsteps, like
Vaska.
Soon aer Prince Kaluzhsky arrived, and Liza Merkalova with Stremov. Liza
Merkalova was a thin brunee, with an Oriental, languid type of face, and—as
everyone used to say—exquisite enigmatic eyes. e tone of her dark dress (Anna
immediately observed and appreciated the fact) was in perfect harmony with her
style of beauty. Liza was as so and enervated as Sappho was smart and abrupt.
But to Anna’s taste Liza was far more aractive. Betsy had said to Anna that
she had adopted the pose of an innocent child, but when Anna saw her, she felt
that this was not the truth. She really was both innocent and corrupt, but a sweet
and passive woman. It is true that her tone was the same as Sappho’s; that like
Sappho, she had two men, one young and one old, tacked onto her, and devouring
her with their eyes. But there was something in her higher than what surrounded
her. ere was in her the glow of the real diamond among glass imitations. is
glow shone out in her exquisite, truly enigmatic eyes. e weary, and at the same
time passionate, glance of those eyes, encircled by dark rings, impressed one by its
perfect sincerity. Everyone looking into those eyes fancied he knew her wholly,
and knowing her, could not but love her. At the sight of Anna, her whole face
lighted up at once with a smile of delight.
"Ah, how glad I am to see you!" she said, going up to her. "Yesterday at the
races all I wanted was to get to you, but you’d gone away. I did so want to see
you, yesterday especially. Wasn’t it awful?" she said, looking at Anna with eyes
that seemed to lay bare all her soul.
"Yes; I had no idea it would be so thrilling," said Anna, blushing.
e company got up at this moment to go into the garden.

cclxxiii
"I’m not going," said Liza, smiling and seling herself close to Anna. "You
won’t go either, will you? Who wants to play croquet?"
"Oh, I like it," said Anna.
"ere, how do you manage never to be bored by things? It’s delightful to
look at you. You’re alive, but I’m bored."
"How can you be bored? Why, you live in the liveliest set in Petersburg,"
said Anna.
"Possibly the people who are not of our set are even more bored; but we—I
certainly—are not happy, but awfully, awfully bored."
Sappho smoking a cigaree went oﬀ into the garden with the two young
men. Betsy and Stremov remained at the tea-table.
"What, bored!" said Betsy. "Sappho says they did enjoy themselves tremendously at your house last night."
"Ah, how dreary it all was!" said Liza Merkalova. "We all drove back to my
place aer the races. And always the same people, always the same. Always the
same thing. We lounged about on sofas all the evening. What is there to enjoy
in that? No; do tell me how you manage never to be bored?" she said, addressing
Anna again. "One has but to look at you and one sees, here’s a woman who may
be happy or unhappy, but isn’t bored. Tell me how you do it?"
"I do nothing," answered Anna, blushing at these searching questions.
"at’s the best way," Stremov put in. Stremov was a man of ﬁy, partly
gray, but still vigorous-looking, very ugly, but with a characteristic and intelligent
face. Liza Merkalova was his wife’s niece, and he spent all his leisure hours with
her. On meeting Anna Karenina, as he was Alexey Alexandrovitch’s enemy in the
government, he tried, like a shrewd man and a man of the world, to be particularly
cordial with her, the wife of his enemy.
"‘Nothing,’" he put in with a subtle smile, "that’s the very best way. I told
you long ago," he said, turning to Liza Merkalova, "that if you don’t want to be
bored, you mustn’t think you’re going to be bored. It’s just as you mustn’t be
afraid of not being able to fall asleep, if you’re afraid of sleeplessness. at’s just
what Anna Arkadyevna has just said."
"I should be very glad if I had said it, for it’s not only clever but true," said
Anna, smiling.
"No, do tell me why it is one can’t go to sleep, and one can’t help being
bored?"
"To sleep well one ought to work, and to enjoy oneself one ought to work
too."
"What am I to work for when my work is no use to anybody? And I can’t
and won’t knowingly make a pretense about it."
"You’re incorrigible," said Stremov, not looking at her, and he spoke again to

cclxxiv
Anna. As he rarely met Anna, he could say nothing but commonplaces to her, but
he said those commonplaces as to when she was returning to Petersburg, and how
fond Countess Lidia Ivanovna was of her, with an expression which suggested that
he longed with his whole soul to please her and show his regard for her and even
more than that.
Tushkevitch came in, announcing that the party were awaiting the other
players to begin croquet.
"No, don’t go away, please don’t," pleaded Liza Merkalova, hearing that
Anna was going. Stremov joined in her entreaties.
"It’s too violent a transition," he said, "to go from such company to old
Madame Vrede. And besides, you will only give her a chance for talking scandal, while here you arouse none but such diﬀerent feelings of the highest and
most opposite kind," he said to her.
Anna pondered for an instant in uncertainty. is shrewd man’s ﬂaering words, the naïve, childlike aﬀection shown her by Liza Merkalova, and all
the social atmosphere she was used to,—it was all so easy, and what was in store
for her was so diﬃcult, that she was for a minute in uncertainty whether to remain, whether to put oﬀ a lile longer the painful moment of explanation. But
remembering what was in store for her alone at home, if she did not come to
some decision, remembering that gesture—terrible even in memory—when she
had clutched her hair in both hands—she said good-bye and went away.

Chapter 
In spite of Vronsky’s apparently frivolous life in society, he was a man who hated
irregularity. In early youth in the Corps of Pages, he had experienced the humiliation of a refusal, when he had tried, being in diﬃculties, to borrow money, and
since then he had never once put himself in the same position again.
In order to keep his aﬀairs in some sort of order, he used about ﬁve times
a year (more or less frequently, according to circumstances) to shut himself up
alone and put all his aﬀairs into deﬁnite shape. is he used to call his day of
reckoning or faire la lessive.
On waking up the day aer the races, Vronsky put on a white linen coat,
and without shaving or taking his bath, he distributed about the table moneys,
bills, and leers, and set to work. Petritsky, who knew he was ill-tempered on
such occasions, on waking up and seeing his comrade at the writing-table, quietly
dressed and went out without geing in his way.
Every man who knows to the minutest details all the complexity of the conditions surrounding him, cannot help imagining that the complexity of these con-

cclxxv
ditions, and the diﬃculty of making them clear, is something exceptional and
personal, peculiar to himself, and never supposes that others are surrounded by
just as complicated an array of personal aﬀairs as he is. So indeed it seemed to
Vronsky. And not without inward pride, and not without reason, he thought that
any other man would long ago have been in diﬃculties, would have been forced
to some dishonorable course, if he had found himself in such a diﬃcult position.
But Vronsky felt that now especially it was essential for him to clear up and deﬁne
his position if he were to avoid geing into diﬃculties.
What Vronsky aacked ﬁrst as being the easiest was his pecuniary position. Writing out on note paper in his minute hand all that he owed, he added
up the amount and found that his debts amounted to seventeen thousand and
some odd hundreds, which he le out for the sake of clearness. Reckoning up his
money and his bank book, he found that he had le one thousand eight hundred
roubles, and nothing coming in before the New Year. Reckoning over again his
list of debts, Vronsky copied it, dividing it into three classes. In the ﬁrst class he
put the debts which he would have to pay at once, or for which he must in any
case have the money ready so that on demand for payment there could not be
a moment’s delay in paying. Such debts amounted to about four thousand: one
thousand ﬁve hundred for a horse, and two thousand ﬁve hundred as surety for a
young comrade, Venovsky, who had lost that sum to a cardsharper in Vronsky’s
presence. Vronsky had wanted to pay the money at the time (he had that amount
then), but Venovsky and Yashvin had insisted that they would pay and not Vronsky, who had not played. at was so far well, but Vronsky knew that in this
dirty business, though his only share in it was undertaking by word of mouth to
be surety for Venovsky, it was absolutely necessary for him to have the two thousand ﬁve hundred roubles so as to be able to ﬂing it at the swindler, and have no
more words with him. And so for this ﬁrst and most important division he must
have four thousand roubles. e second class—eight thousand roubles—consisted
of less important debts. ese were principally accounts owing in connection
with his race horses, to the purveyor of oats and hay, the English saddler, and
so on. He would have to pay some two thousand roubles on these debts too, in
order to be quite free from anxiety. e last class of debts—to shops, to hotels,
to his tailor—were such as need not be considered. So that he needed at least
six thousand roubles for current expenses, and he only had one thousand eight
hundred. For a man with one hundred thousand roubles of revenue, which was
what everyone ﬁxed as Vronsky’s income, such debts, one would suppose, could
hardly be embarrassing; but the fact was that he was far from having one hundred
thousand. His father’s immense property, which alone yielded a yearly income
of two hundred thousand, was le undivided between the brothers. At the time
when the elder brother, with a mass of debts, married Princess Varya Tchirkova,

cclxxvi
the daughter of a Decembrist without any fortune whatever, Alexey had given up
to his elder brother almost the whole income from his father’s estate, reserving
for himself only twenty-ﬁve thousand a year from it. Alexey had said at the time
to his brother that that sum would be suﬃcient for him until he married, which
he probably never would do. And his brother, who was in command of one of
the most expensive regiments, and was only just married, could not decline the
gi. His mother, who had her own separate property, had allowed Alexey every
year twenty thousand in addition to the twenty-ﬁve thousand he had reserved,
and Alexey had spent it all. Of late his mother, incensed with him on account
of his love aﬀair and his leaving Moscow, had given up sending him the money.
And in consequence of this, Vronsky, who had been in the habit of living on the
scale of forty-ﬁve thousand a year, having only received twenty thousand that
year, found himself now in diﬃculties. To get out of these diﬃculties, he could
not apply to his mother for money. Her last leer, which he had received the
day before, had particularly exasperated him by the hints in it that she was quite
ready to help him to succeed in the world and in the army, but not to lead a life
which was a scandal to all good society. His mother’s aempt to buy him stung
him to the quick and made him feel colder than ever to her. But he could not
draw back from the generous word when it was once uered, even though he
felt now, vaguely foreseeing certain eventualities in his intrigue with Madame
Karenina, that this generous word had been spoken thoughtlessly, and that even
though he were not married he might need all the hundred thousand of income.
But it was impossible to draw back. He had only to recall his brother’s wife, to
remember how that sweet, delightful Varya sought, at every convenient opportunity, to remind him that she remembered his generosity and appreciated it, to
grasp the impossibility of taking back his gi. It was as impossible as beating a
woman, stealing, or lying. One thing only could and ought to be done, and Vronsky determined upon it without an instant’s hesitation: to borrow money from a
money-lender, ten thousand roubles, a proceeding which presented no diﬃculty,
to cut down his expenses generally, and to sell his race horses. Resolving on this,
he promptly wrote a note to Rolandak, who had more than once sent to him with
oﬀers to buy horses from him. en he sent for the Englishman and the moneylender, and divided what money he had according to the accounts he intended
to pay. Having ﬁnished this business, he wrote a cold and cuing answer to his
mother. en he took out of his notebook three notes of Anna’s, read them again,
burned them, and remembering their conversation on the previous day, he sank
into meditation.

Chapter 

cclxxvii
Vronsky’s life was particularly happy in that he had a code of principles, which
deﬁned with unfailing certitude what he ought and what he ought not to do. is
code of principles covered only a very small circle of contingencies, but then the
principles were never doubtful, and Vronsky, as he never went outside that circle,
had never had a moment’s hesitation about doing what he ought to do. ese
principles laid down as invariable rules: that one must pay a cardsharper, but
need not pay a tailor; that one must never tell a lie to a man, but one may to
a woman; that one must never cheat anyone, but one may a husband; that one
must never pardon an insult, but one may give one and so on. ese principles
were possibly not reasonable and not good, but they were of unfailing certainty,
and so long as he adhered to them, Vronsky felt that his heart was at peace and
he could hold his head up. Only quite lately in regard to his relations with Anna,
Vronsky had begun to feel that his code of principles did not fully cover all possible
contingencies, and to foresee in the future diﬃculties and perplexities for which
he could ﬁnd no guiding clue.
His present relation to Anna and to her husband was to his mind clear and
simple. It was clearly and precisely deﬁned in the code of principles by which he
was guided.
She was an honorable woman who had bestowed her love upon him, and he
loved her, and therefore she was in his eyes a woman who had a right to the same,
or even more, respect than a lawful wife. He would have had his hand chopped
oﬀ before he would have allowed himself by a word, by a hint, to humiliate her,
or even to fall short of the fullest respect a woman could look for.
His aitude to society, too, was clear. Everyone might know, might suspect
it, but no one might dare to speak of it. If any did so, he was ready to force all
who might speak to be silent and to respect the non-existent honor of the woman
he loved.
His aitude to the husband was the clearest of all. From the moment that
Anna loved Vronsky, he had regarded his own right over her as the one thing
unassailable. Her husband was simply a superﬂuous and tiresome person. No
doubt he was in a pitiable position, but how could that be helped? e one thing
the husband had a right to was to demand satisfaction with a weapon in his hand,
and Vronsky was prepared for this at any minute.
But of late new inner relations had arisen between him and her, which
frightened Vronsky by their indeﬁniteness. Only the day before she had told him
that she was with child. And he felt that this fact and what she expected of him
called for something not fully deﬁned in that code of principles by which he had
hitherto steered his course in life. And he had been indeed caught unawares, and
at the ﬁrst moment when she spoke to him of her position, his heart had prompted
him to beg her to leave her husband. He had said that, but now thinking things

cclxxviii
over he saw clearly that it would be beer to manage to avoid that; and at the
same time, as he told himself so, he was afraid whether it was not wrong.
"If I told her to leave her husband, that must mean uniting her life with
mine; am I prepared for that? How can I take her away now, when I have no
money? Supposing I could arrange…. But how can I take her away while I’m in
the service? If I say that—I ought to be prepared to do it, that is, I ought to have
the money and to retire from the army."
And he grew thoughtful. e question whether to retire from the service or
not brought him to the other and perhaps the chief though hidden interest of his
life, of which none knew but he.
Ambition was the old dream of his youth and childhood, a dream which he
did not confess even to himself, though it was so strong that now this passion
was even doing bale with his love. His ﬁrst steps in the world and in the service
had been successful, but two years before he had made a great mistake. Anxious
to show his independence and to advance, he had refused a post that had been
oﬀered him, hoping that this refusal would heighten his value; but it turned out
that he had been too bold, and he was passed over. And having, whether he liked
or not, taken up for himself the position of an independent man, he carried it oﬀ
with great tact and good sense, behaving as though he bore no grudge against
anyone, did not regard himself as injured in any way, and cared for nothing but
to be le alone since he was enjoying himself. In reality he had ceased to enjoy
himself as long ago as the year before, when he went away to Moscow. He felt
that this independent aitude of a man who might have done anything, but cared
to do nothing, was already beginning to pall, that many people were beginning
to fancy that he was not really capable of anything but being a straightforward,
good-natured fellow. His connection with Madame Karenina, by creating so much
sensation and aracting general aention, had given him a fresh distinction which
soothed his gnawing worm of ambition for a while, but a week before that worm
had been roused up again with fresh force. e friend of his childhood, a man of
the same set, of the same coterie, his comrade in the Corps of Pages, Serpuhovskoy,
who had le school with him and had been his rival in class, in gymnastics, in their
scrapes and their dreams of glory, had come back a few days before from Central
Asia, where he had gained two steps up in rank, and an order rarely bestowed
upon generals so young.
As soon as he arrived in Petersburg, people began to talk about him as a
newly risen star of the ﬁrst magnitude. A schoolfellow of Vronsky’s and of the
same age, he was a general and was expecting a command, which might have inﬂuence on the course of political events; while Vronsky, independent and brilliant
and beloved by a charming woman though he was, was simply a cavalry captain
who was readily allowed to be as independent as ever he liked. "Of course I don’t

cclxxix
envy Serpuhovskoy and never could envy him; but his advancement shows me
that one has only to watch one’s opportunity, and the career of a man like me
may be very rapidly made. ree years ago he was in just the same position as I
am. If I retire, I burn my ships. If I remain in the army, I lose nothing. She said
herself she did not wish to change her position. And with her love I cannot feel
envious of Serpuhovskoy." And slowly twirling his mustaches, he got up from the
table and walked about the room. His eyes shone particularly brightly, and he
felt in that conﬁdent, calm, and happy frame of mind which always came aer he
had thoroughly faced his position. Everything was straight and clear, just as aer
former days of reckoning. He shaved, took a cold bath, dressed and went out.

Chapter 
"We’ve come to fetch you. Your lessive lasted a good time today," said Petritsky.
"Well, is it over?"
"It is over," answered Vronsky, smiling with his eyes only, and twirling the
tips of his mustaches as circumspectly as though aer the perfect order into which
his aﬀairs had been brought any over-bold or rapid movement might disturb it.
"You’re always just as if you’d come out of a bath aer it," said Petritsky.
"I’ve come from Gritsky’s" (that was what they called the colonel); "they’re expecting you."
Vronsky, without answering, looked at his comrade, thinking of something
else.
"Yes; is that music at his place?" he said, listening to the familiar sounds of
polkas and waltzes ﬂoating across to him. "What’s the fête?"
"Serpuhovskoy’s come."
"Aha!" said Vronsky, "why, I didn’t know."
e smile in his eyes gleamed more brightly than ever.
Having once made up his mind that he was happy in his love, that he sacriﬁced his ambition to it—having anyway taken up this position, Vronsky was incapable of feeling either envious of Serpuhovskoy or hurt with him for not coming
ﬁrst to him when he came to the regiment. Serpuhovskoy was a good friend, and
he was delighted he had come.
"Ah, I’m very glad!"
e colonel, Demin, had taken a large country house. e whole party were
in the wide lower balcony. In the courtyard the ﬁrst objects that met Vronsky’s
eyes were a band of singers in white linen coats, standing near a barrel of vodka,
and the robust, good-humored ﬁgure of the colonel surrounded by oﬃcers. He
had gone out as far as the ﬁrst step of the balcony and was loudly shouting across

cclxxx
the band that played Oﬀenbach’s quadrille, waving his arms and giving some orders to a few soldiers standing on one side. A group of soldiers, a quartermaster,
and several subalterns came up to the balcony with Vronsky. e colonel returned
to the table, went out again onto the steps with a tumbler in his hand, and proposed the toast, "To the health of our former comrade, the gallant general, Prince
Serpuhovskoy. Hurrah!"
e colonel was followed by Serpuhovskoy, who came out onto the steps
smiling, with a glass in his hand.
"You always get younger, Bondarenko," he said to the rosy-checked, smartlooking quartermaster standing just before him, still youngish looking though
doing his second term of service.
It was three years since Vronsky had seen Serpuhovskoy. He looked more
robust, had let his whiskers grow, but was still the same graceful creature, whose
face and ﬁgure were even more striking from their soness and nobility than their
beauty. e only change Vronsky detected in him was that subdued, continual
radiance of beaming content which seles on the faces of men who are successful
and are sure of the recognition of their success by everyone. Vronsky knew that
radiant air, and immediately observed it in Serpuhovskoy.
As Serpuhovskoy came down the steps he saw Vronsky. A smile of pleasure
lighted up his face. He tossed his head upwards and waved the glass in his hand,
greeting Vronsky, and showing him by the gesture that he could not come to him
before the quartermaster, who stood craning forward his lips ready to be kissed.
"Here he is!" shouted the colonel. "Yashvin told me you were in one of your
gloomy tempers."
Serpuhovskoy kissed the moist, fresh lips of the gallant-looking quartermaster, and wiping his mouth with his handkerchief, went up to Vronsky.
"How glad I am!" he said, squeezing his hand and drawing him on one side.
"You look aer him," the colonel shouted to Yashvin, pointing to Vronsky;
and he went down below to the soldiers.
"Why weren’t you at the races yesterday? I expected to see you there," said
Vronsky, scrutinizing Serpuhovskoy.
"I did go, but late. I beg your pardon," he added, and he turned to the adjutant: "Please have this divided from me, each man as much as it runs to." And he
hurriedly took notes for three hundred roubles from his pocketbook, blushing a
lile.
"Vronsky! Have anything to eat or drink?" asked Yashvin. "Hi, something
for the count to eat! Ah, here it is: have a glass!"
e fête at the colonel’s lasted a long while. ere was a great deal of drinking. ey tossed Serpuhovskoy in the air and caught him again several times.
en they did the same to the colonel. en, to the accompaniment of the band,

cclxxxi
the colonel himself danced with Petritsky. en the colonel, who began to show
signs of feebleness, sat down on a bench in the courtyard and began demonstrating to Yashvin the superiority of Russia over Poland, especially in cavalry aack,
and there was a lull in the revelry for a moment. Serpuhovskoy went into the
house to the bathroom to wash his hands and found Vronsky there; Vronsky was
drenching his head with water. He had taken oﬀ his coat and put his sunburnt,
hairy neck under the tap, and was rubbing it and his head with his hands. When
he had ﬁnished, Vronsky sat down by Serpuhovskoy. ey both sat down in the
bathroom on a lounge, and a conversation began which was very interesting to
both of them.
"I’ve always been hearing about you through my wife," said Serpuhovskoy.
"I’m glad you’ve been seeing her prey oen."
"She’s friendly with Varya, and they’re the only women in Petersburg I care
about seeing," answered Vronsky, smiling. He smiled because he foresaw the topic
the conversation would turn on, and he was glad of it.
"e only ones?" Serpuhovskoy queried, smiling.
"Yes; and I heard news of you, but not only through your wife," said Vronsky,
checking his hint by a stern expression of face. "I was greatly delighted to hear of
your success, but not a bit surprised. I expected even more."
Serpuhovskoy smiled. Such an opinion of him was obviously agreeable to
him, and he did not think it necessary to conceal it.
"Well, I on the contrary expected less—I’ll own frankly. But I’m glad, very
glad. I’m ambitious; that’s my weakness, and I confess to it."
"Perhaps you wouldn’t confess to it if you hadn’t been successful," said Vronsky.
"I don’t suppose so," said Serpuhovskoy, smiling again. "I won’t say life
wouldn’t be worth living without it, but it would be dull. Of course I may be
mistaken, but I fancy I have a certain capacity for the line I’ve chosen, and that
power of any sort in my hands, if it is to be, will be beer than in the hands of
a good many people I know," said Serpuhovskoy, with beaming consciousness of
success; "and so the nearer I get to it, the beer pleased I am."
"Perhaps that is true for you, but not for everyone. I used to think so too,
but here I live and think life worth living not only for that."
"ere it’s out! here it comes!" said Serpuhovskoy, laughing. "Ever since I
heard about you, about your refusal, I began…. Of course, I approved of what you
did. But there are ways of doing everything. And I think your action was good in
itself, but you didn’t do it quite in the way you ought to have done."
"What’s done can’t be undone, and you know I never go back on what I’ve
done. And besides, I’m very well oﬀ."
"Very well oﬀ—for the time. But you’re not satisﬁed with that. I wouldn’t

cclxxxii
say this to your brother. He’s a nice child, like our host here. ere he goes!" he
added, listening to the roar of "hurrah!"—"and he’s happy, but that does not satisfy
you."
"I didn’t say it did satisfy me."
"Yes, but that’s not the only thing. Such men as you are wanted."
"By whom?"
"By whom? By society, by Russia. Russia needs men; she needs a party, or
else everything goes and will go to the dogs."
"How do you mean? Bertenev’s party against the Russian communists?"
"No," said Serpuhovskoy, frowning with vexation at being suspected of such
an absurdity. "Tout ça est une blague. at’s always been and always will be. ere
are no communists. But intriguing people have to invent a noxious, dangerous
party. It’s an old trick. No, what’s wanted is a powerful party of independent men
like you and me."
"But why so?" Vronsky mentioned a few men who were in power. "Why
aren’t they independent men?"
"Simply because they have not, or have not had from birth, an independent
fortune; they’ve not had a name, they’ve not been close to the sun and center as
we have. ey can be bought either by money or by favor. And they have to
ﬁnd a support for themselves in inventing a policy. And they bring forward some
notion, some policy that they don’t believe in, that does harm; and the whole
policy is really only a means to a government house and so much income. Cela
n’est pas plus ﬁn que ça, when you get a peep at their cards. I may be inferior
to them, stupider perhaps, though I don’t see why I should be inferior to them.
But you and I have one important advantage over them for certain, in being more
diﬃcult to buy. And such men are more needed than ever."
Vronsky listened aentively, but he was not so much interested by the
meaning of the words as by the aitude of Serpuhovskoy who was already contemplating a struggle with the existing powers, and already had his likes and
dislikes in that higher world, while his own interest in the governing world did
not go beyond the interests of his regiment. Vronsky felt, too, how powerful Serpuhovskoy might become through his unmistakable faculty for thinking things
out and for taking things in, through his intelligence and gi of words, so rarely
met with in the world in which he moved. And, ashamed as he was of the feeling,
he felt envious.
"Still I haven’t the one thing of most importance for that," he answered; "I
haven’t the desire for power. I had it once, but it’s gone."
"Excuse me, that’s not true," said Serpuhovskoy, smiling.
"Yes, it is true, it is true … now!" Vronsky added, to be truthful.
"Yes, it’s true now, that’s another thing; but that now won’t last forever."

cclxxxiii
"Perhaps," answered Vronsky.
"You say perhaps," Serpuhovskoy went on, as though guessing his thoughts,
"but I say for certain. And that’s what I wanted to see you for. Your action was just
what it should have been. I see that, but you ought not to keep it up. I only ask
you to give me carte blanche. I’m not going to oﬀer you my protection … though,
indeed, why shouldn’t I protect you?—you’ve protected me oen enough! I should
hope our friendship rises above all that sort of thing. Yes," he said, smiling to him
as tenderly as a woman, "give me carte blane, retire from the regiment, and I’ll
draw you upwards imperceptibly."
"But you must understand that I want nothing," said Vronsky, "except that
all should be as it is."
Serpuhovskoy got up and stood facing him.
"You say that all should be as it is. I understand what that means. But
listen: we’re the same age, you’ve known a greater number of women perhaps
than I have." Serpohovskoy’s smile and gestures told Vronsky that he mustn’t be
afraid, that he would be tender and careful in touching the sore place. "But I’m
married, and believe me, in geing to know thoroughly one’s wife, if one loves
her, as someone has said, one gets to know all women beer than if one knew
thousands of them."
"We’re coming directly!" Vronsky shouted to an oﬃcer, who looked into the
room and called them to the colonel.
Vronsky was longing now to hear to the end and know what Serpuhovskey
would say to him.
"And here’s my opinion for you. Women are the chief stumbling block in a
man’s career. It’s hard to love a woman and do anything. ere’s only one way
of having love conveniently without its being a hindrance—that’s marriage. How,
how am I to tell you what I mean?" said Serpuhovskoy, who liked similes. "Wait a
minute, wait a minute! Yes, just as you can only carry a fardeau and do something
with your hands, when the fardeau is tied on your back, and that’s marriage. And
that’s what I felt when I was married. My hands were suddenly set free. But to
drag that fardeau about with you without marriage, your hands will always be so
full that you can do nothing. Look at Mazankov, at Krupov. ey’ve ruined their
careers for the sake of women."
"What women!" said Vronsky, recalling the Frenchwoman and the actress
with whom the two men he had mentioned were connected.
"e ﬁrmer the woman’s footing in society, the worse it is. at’s much the
same as—not merely carrying the fardeau in your arms—but tearing it away from
someone else."
"You have never loved," Vronsky said soly, looking straight before him and
thinking of Anna.

cclxxxiv
"Perhaps. But you remember what I’ve said to you. And another thing,
women are all more materialistic than men. We make something immense out of
love, but they are always terre-à-terre."
"Directly, directly!" he cried to a footman who came in. But the footman
had not come to call them again, as he supposed. e footman brought Vronsky
a note.
"A man brought it from Princess Tverskaya."
Vronsky opened the leer, and ﬂushed crimson.
"My head’s begun to ache; I’m going home," he said to Serpuhovskoy.
"Oh, good-bye then. You give me carte blane!"
"We’ll talk about it later on; I’ll look you up in Petersburg."

Chapter 
It was six o’clock already, and so, in order to be there quickly, and at the same time
not to drive with his own horses, known to everyone, Vronsky got into Yashvin’s
hired ﬂy, and told the driver to drive as quickly as possible. It was a roomy, oldfashioned ﬂy, with seats for four. He sat in one corner, stretched his legs out on
the front seat, and sank into meditation.
A vague sense of the order into which his aﬀairs had been brought, a vague
recollection of the friendliness and ﬂaery of Serpuhovskoy, who had considered
him a man that was needed, and most of all, the anticipation of the interview
before him—all blended into a general, joyous sense of life. is feeling was so
strong that he could not help smiling. He dropped his legs, crossed one leg over
the other knee, and taking it in his hand, felt the springy muscle of the calf, where
it had been grazed the day before by his fall, and leaning back he drew several
deep breaths.
"I’m happy, very happy!" he said to himself. He had oen before had this
sense of physical joy in his own body, but he had never felt so fond of himself,
of his own body, as at that moment. He enjoyed the slight ache in his strong leg,
he enjoyed the muscular sensation of movement in his chest as he breathed. e
bright, cold August day, which had made Anna feel so hopeless, seemed to him
keenly stimulating, and refreshed his face and neck that still tingled from the cold
water. e scent of brilliantine on his whiskers struck him as particularly pleasant in the fresh air. Everything he saw from the carriage window, everything
in that cold pure air, in the pale light of the sunset, was as fresh, and gay, and
strong as he was himself: the roofs of the houses shining in the rays of the seing
sun, the sharp outlines of fences and angles of buildings, the ﬁgures of passers-by,
the carriages that met him now and then, the motionless green of the trees and

cclxxxv
grass, the ﬁelds with evenly drawn furrows of potatoes, and the slanting shadows that fell from the houses, and trees, and bushes, and even from the rows of
potatoes—everything was bright like a prey landscape just ﬁnished and freshly
varnished.
"Get on, get on!" he said to the driver, puing his head out of the window,
and pulling a three-rouble note out of his pocket he handed it to the man as he
looked round. e driver’s hand fumbled with something at the lamp, the whip
cracked, and the carriage rolled rapidly along the smooth highroad.
"I want nothing, nothing but this happiness," he thought, staring at the bone
buon of the bell in the space between the windows, and picturing to himself
Anna just as he had seen her last time. "And as I go on, I love her more and more.
Here’s the garden of the Vrede Villa. Whereabouts will she be? Where? How?
Why did she ﬁx on this place to meet me, and why does she write in Betsy’s
leer?" he thought, wondering now for the ﬁrst time at it. But there was now
no time for wonder. He called to the driver to stop before reaching the avenue,
and opening the door, jumped out of the carriage as it was moving, and went
into the avenue that led up to the house. ere was no one in the avenue; but
looking round to the right he caught sight of her. Her face was hidden by a veil,
but he drank in with glad eyes the special movement in walking, peculiar to her
alone, the slope of the shoulders, and the seing of the head, and at once a sort of
electric shock ran all over him. With fresh force, he felt conscious of himself from
the springy motions of his legs to the movements of his lungs as he breathed, and
something set his lips twitching.
Joining him, she pressed his hand tightly.
"You’re not angry that I sent for you? I absolutely had to see you," she said;
and the serious and set line of her lips, which he saw under the veil, transformed
his mood at once.
"I angry! But how have you come, where from?"
"Never mind," she said, laying her hand on his, "come along, I must talk to
you."
He saw that something had happened, and that the interview would not be
a joyous one. In her presence he had no will of his own: without knowing the
grounds of her distress, he already felt the same distress unconsciously passing
over him.
"What is it? what?" he asked her, squeezing her hand with his elbow, and
trying to read her thoughts in her face.
She walked on a few steps in silence, gathering up her courage; then suddenly she stopped.
"I did not tell you yesterday," she began, breathing quickly and painfully,
"that coming home with Alexey Alexandrovitch I told him everything … told him

cclxxxvi
I could not be his wife, that … and told him everything."
He heard her, unconsciously bending his whole ﬁgure down to her as
though hoping in this way to soen the hardness of her position for her. But
directly she had said this he suddenly drew himself up, and a proud and hard
expression came over his face.
"Yes, yes, that’s beer, a thousand times beer! I know how painful it was,"
he said. But she was not listening to his words, she was reading his thoughts from
the expression of his face. She could not guess that that expression arose from the
ﬁrst idea that presented itself to Vronsky—that a duel was now inevitable. e idea
of a duel had never crossed her mind, and so she put a diﬀerent interpretation on
this passing expression of hardness.
When she got her husband’s leer, she knew then at the boom of her heart
that everything would go on in the old way, that she would not have the strength
of will to forego her position, to abandon her son, and to join her lover. e
morning spent at Princess Tverskaya’s had conﬁrmed her still more in this. But
this interview was still of the utmost gravity for her. She hoped that this interview
would transform her position, and save her. If on hearing this news he were
to say to her resolutely, passionately, without an instant’s wavering: "row up
everything and come with me!" she would give up her son and go away with him.
But this news had not produced what she had expected in him; he simply seemed
as though he were resenting some aﬀront.
"It was not in the least painful to me. It happened of itself," she said irritably;
"and see…" she pulled her husband’s leer out of her glove.
"I understand, I understand," he interrupted her, taking the leer, but not
reading it, and trying to soothe her. "e one thing I longed for, the one thing I
prayed for, was to cut short this position, so as to devote my life to your happiness."
"Why do you tell me that?" she said. "Do you suppose I can doubt it? If I
doubted…"
"Who’s that coming?" said Vronsky suddenly, pointing to two ladies walking
towards them. "Perhaps they know us!" and he hurriedly turned oﬀ, drawing her
aer him into a side path.
"Oh, I don’t care!" she said. Her lips were quivering. And he fancied that
her eyes looked with strange fury at him from under the veil. "I tell you that’s not
the point—I can’t doubt that; but see what he writes to me. Read it." She stood
still again.
Again, just as at the ﬁrst moment of hearing of her rupture with her husband, Vronsky, on reading the leer, was unconsciously carried away by the natural sensation aroused in him by his own relation to the betrayed husband. Now
while he held his leer in his hands, he could not help picturing the challenge,
which he would most likely ﬁnd at home today or tomorrow, and the duel itself,

cclxxxvii
in which, with the same cold and haughty expression that his face was assuming
at this moment he would await the injured husband’s shot, aer having himself
ﬁred into the air. And at that instant there ﬂashed across his mind the thought
of what Serpuhovskoy had just said to him, and what he had himself been thinking in the morning—that it was beer not to bind himself—and he knew that this
thought he could not tell her.
Having read the leer, he raised his eyes to her, and there was no determination in them. She saw at once that he had been thinking about it before by
himself. She knew that whatever he might say to her, he would not say all he
thought. And she knew that her last hope had failed her. is was not what she
had been reckoning on.
"You see the sort of man he is," she said, with a shaking voice; "he…"
"Forgive me, but I rejoice at it," Vronsky interrupted. "For God’s sake, let me
ﬁnish!" he added, his eyes imploring her to give him time to explain his words. "I
rejoice, because things cannot, cannot possibly remain as he supposes."
"Why can’t they?" Anna said, restraining her tears, and obviously aaching
no sort of consequence to what he said. She felt that her fate was sealed.
Vronsky meant that aer the duel—inevitable, he thought—things could not
go on as before, but he said something diﬀerent.
"It can’t go on. I hope that now you will leave him. I hope"—he was confused, and reddened—"that you will let me arrange and plan our life. Tomorrow…"
he was beginning.
She did not let him go on.
"But my child!" she shrieked. "You see what he writes! I should have to
leave him, and I can’t and won’t do that."
"But, for God’s sake, which is beer?—leave your child, or keep up this
degrading position?"
"To whom is it degrading?"
"To all, and most of all to you."
"You say degrading … don’t say that. ose words have no meaning for me,"
she said in a shaking voice. She did not want him now to say what was untrue.
She had nothing le her but his love, and she wanted to love him. "Don’t you
understand that from the day I loved you everything has changed for me? For me
there is one thing, and one thing only—your love. If that’s mine, I feel so exalted,
so strong, that nothing can be humiliating to me. I am proud of my position,
because … proud of being … proud…." She could not say what she was proud of.
Tears of shame and despair choked her uerance. She stood still and sobbed.
He felt, too, something swelling in his throat and twitching in his nose, and
for the ﬁrst time in his life he felt on the point of weeping. He could not have said
exactly what it was touched him so. He felt sorry for her, and he felt he could not

cclxxxviii
help her, and with that he knew that he was to blame for her wretchedness, and
that he had done something wrong.
"Is not a divorce possible?" he said feebly. She shook her head, not answering. "Couldn’t you take your son, and still leave him?"
"Yes; but it all depends on him. Now I must go to him," she said shortly. Her
presentiment that all would again go on in the old way had not deceived her.
"On Tuesday I shall be in Petersburg, and everything can be seled."
"Yes," she said. "But don’t let us talk any more of it."
Anna’s carriage, which she had sent away, and ordered to come back to the
lile gate of the Vrede garden, drove up. Anna said good-bye to Vronsky, and
drove home.

Chapter 
On Monday there was the usual siing of the Commission of the nd of June.
Alexey Alexandrovitch walked into the hall where the siing was held, greeted
the members and the president, as usual, and sat down in his place, puing his
hand on the papers laid ready before him. Among these papers lay the necessary
evidence and a rough outline of the speech he intended to make. But he did not
really need these documents. He remembered every point, and did not think it
necessary to go over in his memory what he would say. He knew that when the
time came, and when he saw his enemy facing him, and studiously endeavoring
to assume an expression of indiﬀerence, his speech would ﬂow of itself beer
than he could prepare it now. He felt that the import of his speech was of such
magnitude that every word of it would have weight. Meantime, as he listened to
the usual report, he had the most innocent and inoﬀensive air. No one, looking
at his white hands, with their swollen veins and long ﬁngers, so soly stroking
the edges of the white paper that lay before him, and at the air of weariness with
which his head drooped on one side, would have suspected that in a few minutes
a torrent of words would ﬂow from his lips that would arouse a fearful storm,
set the members shouting and aacking one another, and force the president to
call for order. When the report was over, Alexey Alexandrovitch announced in
his subdued, delicate voice that he had several points to bring before the meeting
in regard to the Commission for the Reorganization of the Native Tribes. All
aention was turned upon him. Alexey Alexandrovitch cleared his throat, and not
looking at his opponent, but selecting, as he always did while he was delivering
his speeches, the ﬁrst person siing opposite him, an inoﬀensive lile old man,
who never had an opinion of any sort in the Commission, began to expound his
views. When he reached the point about the fundamental and radical law, his

cclxxxix
opponent jumped up and began to protest. Stremov, who was also a member
of the Commission, and also stung to the quick, began defending himself, and
altogether a stormy siing followed; but Alexey Alexandrovitch triumphed, and
his motion was carried, three new commissions were appointed, and the next day
in a certain Petersburg circle nothing else was talked of but this siing. Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s success had been even greater than he had anticipated.
Next morning, Tuesday, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on waking up, recollected
with pleasure his triumph of the previous day, and he could not help smiling,
though he tried to appear indiﬀerent, when the chief secretary of his department,
anxious to ﬂaer him, informed him of the rumors that had reached him concerning what had happened in the Commission.
Absorbed in business with the chief secretary, Alexey Alexandrovitch had
completely forgoen that it was Tuesday, the day ﬁxed by him for the return of
Anna Arkadyevna, and he was surprised and received a shock of annoyance when
a servant came in to inform him of her arrival.
Anna had arrived in Petersburg early in the morning; the carriage had been
sent to meet her in accordance with her telegram, and so Alexey Alexandrovitch
might have known of her arrival. But when she arrived, he did not meet her. She
was told that he had not yet gone out, but was busy with his secretary. She sent
word to her husband that she had come, went to her own room, and occupied
herself in sorting out her things, expecting he would come to her. But an hour
passed; he did not come. She went into the dining room on the pretext of giving
some directions, and spoke loudly on purpose, expecting him to come out there;
but he did not come, though she heard him go to the door of his study as he parted
from the chief secretary. She knew that he usually went out quickly to his oﬃce,
and she wanted to see him before that, so that their aitude to one another might
be deﬁned.
She walked across the drawing room and went resolutely to him. When she
went into his study he was in oﬃcial uniform, obviously ready to go out, siing
at a lile table on which he rested his elbows, looking dejectedly before him. She
saw him before he saw her, and she saw that he was thinking of her.
On seeing her, he would have risen, but changed his mind, then his face
ﬂushed hotly—a thing Anna had never seen before, and he got up quickly and
went to meet her, looking not at her eyes, but above them at her forehead and
hair. He went up to her, took her by the hand, and asked her to sit down.
"I am very glad you have come," he said, siing down beside her, and obviously wishing to say something, he stuered. Several times he tried to begin to
speak, but stopped. In spite of the fact that, preparing herself for meeting him,
she had schooled herself to despise and reproach him, she did not know what to
say to him, and she felt sorry for him. And so the silence lasted for some time. "Is

ccxc
Seryozha quite well?" he said, and not waiting for an answer, he added: "I shan’t
be dining at home today, and I have got to go out directly."
"I had thought of going to Moscow," she said.
"No, you did quite, quite right to come," he said, and was silent again.
Seeing that he was powerless to begin the conversation, she began herself.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch," she said, looking at him and not dropping her eyes
under his persistent gaze at her hair, "I’m a guilty woman, I’m a bad woman, but
I am the same as I was, as I told you then, and I have come to tell you that I can
change nothing."
"I have asked you no question about that," he said, all at once, resolutely
and with hatred looking her straight in the face; "that was as I had supposed."
Under the inﬂuence of anger he apparently regained complete possession of all
his faculties. "But as I told you then, and have wrien to you," he said in a thin,
shrill voice, "I repeat now, that I am not bound to know this. I ignore it. Not all
wives are so kind as you, to be in such a hurry to communicate such agreeable
news to their husbands." He laid special emphasis on the word "agreeable." "I shall
ignore it so long as the world knows nothing of it, so long as my name is not
disgraced. And so I simply inform you that our relations must be just as they
have always been, and that only in the event of your compromising me I shall be
obliged to take steps to secure my honor."
"But our relations cannot be the same as always," Anna began in a timid
voice, looking at him with dismay.
When she saw once more those composed gestures, heard that shrill, childish, and sarcastic voice, her aversion for him extinguished her pity for him, and
she felt only afraid, but at all costs she wanted to make clear her position.
"I cannot be your wife while I…." she began.
He laughed a cold and malignant laugh.
"e manner of life you have chosen is reﬂected, I suppose, in your ideas.
I have too much respect or contempt, or both … I respect your past and despise
your present … that I was far from the interpretation you put on my words."
Anna sighed and bowed her head.
"ough indeed I fail to comprehend how, with the independence you show,"
he went on, geing hot, "—announcing your inﬁdelity to your husband and seeing
nothing reprehensible in it, apparently—you can see anything reprehensible in
performing a wife’s duties in relation to your husband."
"Alexey Alexandrovitch! What is it you want of me?"
"I want you not to meet that man here, and to conduct yourself so that
neither the world nor the servants can reproach you … not to see him. at’s not
much, I think. And in return you will enjoy all the privileges of a faithful wife
without fulﬁlling her duties. at’s all I have to say to you. Now it’s time for me

ccxci
to go. I’m not dining at home." He got up and moved towards the door.
Anna got up too. Bowing in silence, he let her pass before him.

Chapter 
e night spent by Levin on the haycock did not pass without result for him.
e way in which he had been managing his land revolted him and had lost all
araction for him. In spite of the magniﬁcent harvest, never had there been,
or, at least, never it seemed to him, had there been so many hindrances and so
many quarrels between him and the peasants as that year, and the origin of these
failures and this hostility was now perfectly comprehensible to him. e delight
he had experienced in the work itself, and the consequent greater intimacy with
the peasants, the envy he felt of them, of their life, the desire to adopt that life,
which had been to him that night not a dream but an intention, the execution of
which he had thought out in detail—all this had so transformed his view of the
farming of the land as he had managed it, that he could not take his former interest
in it, and could not help seeing that unpleasant relation between him and the
workpeople which was the foundation of it all. e herd of improved cows such as
Pava, the whole land ploughed over and enriched, the nine level ﬁelds surrounded
with hedges, the two hundred and forty acres heavily manured, the seed sown in
drills, and all the rest of it—it was all splendid if only the work had been done
for themselves, or for themselves and comrades—people in sympathy with them.
But he saw clearly now (his work on a book of agriculture, in which the chief
element in husbandry was to have been the laborer, greatly assisted him in this)
that the sort of farming he was carrying on was nothing but a cruel and stubborn
struggle between him and the laborers, in which there was on one side—his side—a
continual intense eﬀort to change everything to a paern he considered beer; on
the other side, the natural order of things. And in this struggle he saw that with
immense expenditure of force on his side, and with no eﬀort or even intention on
the other side, all that was aained was that the work did not go to the liking of
either side, and that splendid tools, splendid cale and land were spoiled with no
good to anyone. Worst of all, the energy expended on this work was not simply
wasted. He could not help feeling now, since the meaning of this system had
become clear to him, that the aim of his energy was a most unworthy one. In
reality, what was the struggle about? He was struggling for every farthing of
his share (and he could not help it, for he had only to relax his eﬀorts, and he
would not have had the money to pay his laborers’ wages), while they were only
struggling to be able to do their work easily and agreeably, that is to say, as they
were used to doing it. It was for his interests that every laborer should work as

ccxcii
hard as possible, and that while doing so he should keep his wits about him, so
as to try not to break the winnowing machines, the horse rakes, the thrashing
machines, that he should aend to what he was doing. What the laborer wanted
was to work as pleasantly as possible, with rests, and above all, carelessly and
heedlessly, without thinking. at summer Levin saw this at every step. He sent
the men to mow some clover for hay, picking out the worst patches where the
clover was overgrown with grass and weeds and of no use for seed; again and
again they mowed the best acres of clover, justifying themselves by the pretense
that the bailiﬀ had told them to, and trying to pacify him with the assurance that
it would be splendid hay; but he knew that it was owing to those acres being
so much easier to mow. He sent out a hay machine for pitching the hay—it was
broken at the ﬁrst row because it was dull work for a peasant to sit on the seat in
front with the great wings waving above him. And he was told, "Don’t trouble,
your honor, sure, the womenfolks will pitch it quick enough." e ploughs were
practically useless, because it never occurred to the laborer to raise the share when
he turned the plough, and forcing it round, he strained the horses and tore up the
ground, and Levin was begged not to mind about it. e horses were allowed
to stray into the wheat because not a single laborer would consent to be nightwatchman, and in spite of orders to the contrary, the laborers insisted on taking
turns for night duty, and Ivan, aer working all day long, fell asleep, and was very
penitent for his fault, saying, "Do what you will to me, your honor."
ey killed three of the best calves by leing them into the clover aermath
without care as to their drinking, and nothing would make the men believe that
they had been blown out by the clover, but they told him, by way of consolation,
that one of his neighbors had lost a hundred and twelve head of cale in three
days. All this happened, not because anyone felt ill-will to Levin or his farm; on
the contrary, he knew that they liked him, thought him a simple gentleman (their
highest praise); but it happened simply because all they wanted was to work merrily and carelessly, and his interests were not only remote and incomprehensible
to them, but fatally opposed to their most just claims. Long before, Levin had
felt dissatisfaction with his own position in regard to the land. He saw where his
boat leaked, but he did not look for the leak, perhaps purposely deceiving himself.
(Nothing would be le him if he lost faith in it.) But now he could deceive himself
no longer. e farming of the land, as he was managing it, had become not merely
unaractive but revolting to him, and he could take no further interest in it.
To this now was joined the presence, only twenty-ﬁve miles oﬀ, of Kiy
Shtcherbatskaya, whom he longed to see and could not see. Darya Alexandrovna
Oblonskaya had invited him, when he was over there, to come; to come with the
object of renewing his oﬀer to her sister, who would, so she gave him to understand, accept him now. Levin himself had felt on seeing Kiy Shtcherbatskaya

ccxciii
that he had never ceased to love her; but he could not go over to the Oblonskys’,
knowing she was there. e fact that he had made her an oﬀer, and she had refused him, had placed an insuperable barrier between her and him. "I can’t ask
her to be my wife merely because she can’t be the wife of the man she wanted
to marry," he said to himself. e thought of this made him cold and hostile to
her. "I should not be able to speak to her without a feeling of reproach; I could
not look at her without resentment; and she will only hate me all the more, as
she’s bound to. And besides, how can I now, aer what Darya Alexandrovna told
me, go to see them? Can I help showing that I know what she told me? And
me to go magnanimously to forgive her, and have pity on her! Me go through a
performance before her of forgiving, and deigning to bestow my love on her!…
What induced Darya Alexandrovna to tell me that? By chance I might have seen
her, then everything would have happened of itself; but, as it is, it’s out of the
question, out of the question!"
Darya Alexandrovna sent him a leer, asking him for a side-saddle for
Kiy’s use. "I’m told you have a side-saddle," she wrote to him; "I hope you will
bring it over yourself."
is was more than he could stand. How could a woman of any intelligence,
of any delicacy, put her sister in such a humiliating position! He wrote ten notes,
and tore them all up, and sent the saddle without any reply. To write that he
would go was impossible, because he could not go; to write that he could not
come because something prevented him, or that he would be away, that was still
worse. He sent the saddle without an answer, and with a sense of having done
something shameful; he handed over all the now revolting business of the estate
to the bailiﬀ, and set oﬀ next day to a remote district to see his friend Sviazhsky,
who had splendid marshes for grouse in his neighborhood, and had lately wrien
to ask him to keep a long-standing promise to stay with him. e grouse-marsh,
in the Surovsky district, had long tempted Levin, but he had continually put oﬀ
this visit on account of his work on the estate. Now he was glad to get away
from the neighborhood of the Shtcherbatskys, and still more from his farm work,
especially on a shooting expedition, which always in trouble served as the best
consolation.

Chapter 
In the Surovsky district there was no railway nor service of post horses, and Levin
drove there with his own horses in his big, old-fashioned carriage.
He stopped halfway at a well-to-do peasant’s to feed his horses. A bald,
well-preserved old man, with a broad, red beard, gray on his cheeks, opened the

ccxciv
gate, squeezing against the gatepost to let the three horses pass. Directing the
coachman to a place under the shed in the big, clean, tidy yard, with charred,
old-fashioned ploughs in it, the old man asked Levin to come into the parlor. A
cleanly dressed young woman, with clogs on her bare feet, was scrubbing the ﬂoor
in the new outer room. She was frightened of the dog, that ran in aer Levin, and
uered a shriek, but began laughing at her own fright at once when she was told
the dog would not hurt her. Pointing Levin with her bare arm to the door into the
parlor, she bent down again, hiding her handsome face, and went on scrubbing.
"Would you like the samovar?" she asked.
"Yes, please."
e parlor was a big room, with a Dutch stove, and a screen dividing it into
two. Under the holy pictures stood a table painted in paerns, a bench, and two
chairs. Near the entrance was a dresser full of crockery. e shuers were closed,
there were few ﬂies, and it was so clean that Levin was anxious that Laska, who
had been running along the road and bathing in puddles, should not muddy the
ﬂoor, and ordered her to a place in the corner by the door. Aer looking round
the parlor, Levin went out in the back yard. e good-looking young woman in
clogs, swinging the empty pails on the yoke, ran on before him to the well for
water.
"Look sharp, my girl!" the old man shouted aer her, good-humoredly, and
he went up to Levin. "Well, sir, are you going to Nikolay Ivanovitch Sviazhsky?
His honor comes to us too," he began, chaing, leaning his elbows on the railing
of the steps. In the middle of the old man’s account of his acquaintance with
Sviazhsky, the gates creaked again, and laborers came into the yard from the ﬁelds,
with wooden ploughs and harrows. e horses harnessed to the ploughs and
harrows were sleek and fat. e laborers were obviously of the household: two
were young men in coon shirts and caps, the two others were hired laborers in
homespun shirts, one an old man, the other a young fellow. Moving oﬀ from the
steps, the old man went up to the horses and began unharnessing them.
"What have they been ploughing?" asked Levin.
"Ploughing up the potatoes. We rent a bit of land too. Fedot, don’t let out
the gelding, but take it to the trough, and we’ll put the other in harness."
"Oh, father, the ploughshares I ordered, has he brought them along?" asked
the big, healthy-looking fellow, obviously the old man’s son.
"ere … in the outer room," answered the old man, bundling together the
harness he had taken oﬀ, and ﬂinging it on the ground. "You can put them on,
while they have dinner."
e good-looking young woman came into the outer room with the full pails
dragging at her shoulders. More women came on the scene from somewhere,
young and handsome, middle-aged, old and ugly, with children and without chil-

ccxcv
dren.
e samovar was beginning to sing; the laborers and the family, having
disposed of the horses, came in to dinner. Levin, geing his provisions out of his
carriage, invited the old man to take tea with him.
"Well, I have had some today already," said the old man, obviously accepting
the invitation with pleasure. "But just a glass for company."
Over their tea Levin heard all about the old man’s farming. Ten years before,
the old man had rented three hundred acres from the lady who owned them,
and a year ago he had bought them and rented another three hundred from a
neighboring landowner. A small part of the land—the worst part—he let out for
rent, while a hundred acres of arable land he cultivated himself with his family
and two hired laborers. e old man complained that things were doing badly. But
Levin saw that he simply did so from a feeling of propriety, and that his farm was
in a ﬂourishing condition. If it had been unsuccessful he would not have bought
land at thirty-ﬁve roubles the acre, he would not have married his three sons and
a nephew, he would not have rebuilt twice aer ﬁres, and each time on a larger
scale. In spite of the old man’s complaints, it was evident that he was proud, and
justly proud, of his prosperity, proud of his sons, his nephew, his sons’ wives, his
horses and his cows, and especially of the fact that he was keeping all this farming
going. From his conversation with the old man, Levin thought he was not averse
to new methods either. He had planted a great many potatoes, and his potatoes,
as Levin had seen driving past, were already past ﬂowering and beginning to die
down, while Levin’s were only just coming into ﬂower. He earthed up his potatoes
with a modern plough borrowed from a neighboring landowner. He sowed wheat.
e triﬂing fact that, thinning out his rye, the old man used the rye he thinned
out for his horses, specially struck Levin. How many times had Levin seen this
splendid fodder wasted, and tried to get it saved; but always it had turned out to
be impossible. e peasant got this done, and he could not say enough in praise
of it as food for the beasts.
"What have the wenches to do? ey carry it out in bundles to the roadside,
and the cart brings it away."
"Well, we landowners can’t manage well with our laborers," said Levin,
handing him a glass of tea.
"ank you," said the old man, and he took the glass, but refused sugar,
pointing to a lump he had le. "ey’re simple destruction," said he. "Look at
Sviazhsky’s, for instance. We know what the land’s like—ﬁrst-rate, yet there’s
not much of a crop to boast of. It’s not looked aer enough—that’s all it is!"
"But you work your land with hired laborers?"
"We’re all peasants together. We go into everything ourselves. If a man’s
no use, he can go, and we can manage by ourselves."

ccxcvi
"Father, Finogen wants some tar," said the young woman in the clogs, coming in.
"Yes, yes, that’s how it is, sir!" said the old man, geing up, and crossing
himself deliberately, he thanked Levin and went out.
When Levin went into the kitchen to call his coachman he saw the whole
family at dinner. e women were standing up waiting on them. e young,
sturdy-looking son was telling something funny with his mouth full of pudding,
and they were all laughing, the woman in the clogs, who was pouring cabbage
soup into a bowl, laughing most merrily of all.
Very probably the good-looking face of the young woman in the clogs had
a good deal to do with the impression of well-being this peasant household made
upon Levin, but the impression was so strong that Levin could never get rid of
it. And all the way from the old peasant’s to Sviazhsky’s he kept recalling this
peasant farm as though there were something in this impression that demanded
his special aention.

Chapter 
Sviazhsky was the marshal of his district. He was ﬁve years older than Levin,
and had long been married. His sister-in-law, a young girl Levin liked very much,
lived in his house; and Levin knew that Sviazhsky and his wife would have greatly
liked to marry the girl to him. He knew this with certainty, as so-called eligible
young men always know it, though he could never have brought himself to speak
of it to anyone; and he knew too that, although he wanted to get married, and
although by every token this very aractive girl would make an excellent wife,
he could no more have married her, even if he had not been in love with Kiy
Shtcherbatskaya, than he could have ﬂown up to the sky. And this knowledge
poisoned the pleasure he had hoped to ﬁnd in the visit to Sviazhsky.
On geing Sviazhsky’s leer with the invitation for shooting, Levin had
immediately thought of this; but in spite of it he had made up his mind that Sviazhsky’s having such views for him was simply his own groundless supposition,
and so he would go, all the same. Besides, at the boom of his heart he had a
desire to try himself, put himself to the test in regard to this girl. e Sviazhskys’
home-life was exceedingly pleasant, and Sviazhsky himself, the best type of man
taking part in local aﬀairs that Levin knew, was very interesting to him.
Sviazhsky was one of those people, always a source of wonder to Levin,
whose convictions, very logical though never original, go one way by themselves,
while their life, exceedingly deﬁnite and ﬁrm in its direction, goes its way quite
apart and almost always in direct contradiction to their convictions. Sviazhsky

ccxcvii
was an extremely advanced man. He despised the nobility, and believed the mass
of the nobility to be secretly in favor of serfdom, and only concealing their views
from cowardice. He regarded Russia as a ruined country, rather aer the style of
Turkey, and the government of Russia as so bad that he never permied himself to
criticize its doings seriously, and yet he was a functionary of that government and
a model marshal of nobility, and when he drove about he always wore the cockade
of oﬃce and the cap with the red band. He considered human life only tolerable
abroad, and went abroad to stay at every opportunity, and at the same time he
carried on a complex and improved system of agriculture in Russia, and with
extreme interest followed everything and knew everything that was being done in
Russia. He considered the Russian peasant as occupying a stage of development
intermediate between the ape and the man, and at the same time in the local
assemblies no one was readier to shake hands with the peasants and listen to
their opinion. He believed neither in God nor the devil, but was much concerned
about the question of the improvement of the clergy and the maintenance of their
revenues, and took special trouble to keep up the church in his village.
On the woman question he was on the side of the extreme advocates of
complete liberty for women, and especially their right to labor. But he lived with
his wife on such terms that their aﬀectionate childless home life was the admiration of everyone, and arranged his wife’s life so that she did nothing and could
do nothing but share her husband’s eﬀorts that her time should pass as happily
and as agreeably as possible.
If it had not been a characteristic of Levin’s to put the most favorable interpretation on people, Sviazhsky’s character would have presented no doubt or
diﬃculty to him: he would have said to himself, "a fool or a knave," and everything would have seemed clear. But he could not say "a fool," because Sviazhsky
was unmistakably clever, and moreover, a highly cultivated man, who was exceptionally modest over his culture. ere was not a subject he knew nothing of.
But he did not display his knowledge except when he was compelled to do so.
Still less could Levin say that he was a knave, as Sviazhsky was unmistakably an
honest, good-hearted, sensible man, who worked good-humoredly, keenly, and
perseveringly at his work; he was held in high honor by everyone about him,
and certainly he had never consciously done, and was indeed incapable of doing,
anything base.
Levin tried to understand him, and could not understand him, and looked
at him and his life as at a living enigma.
Levin and he were very friendly, and so Levin used to venture to sound
Sviazhsky, to try to get at the very foundation of his view of life; but it was always in vain. Every time Levin tried to penetrate beyond the outer chambers of
Sviazhsky’s mind, which were hospitably open to all, he noticed that Sviazhsky

ccxcviii
was slightly disconcerted; faint signs of alarm were visible in his eyes, as though
he were afraid Levin would understand him, and he would give him a kindly,
good-humored repulse.
Just now, since his disenchantment with farming, Levin was particularly
glad to stay with Sviazhsky. Apart from the fact that the sight of this happy and
aﬀectionate couple, so pleased with themselves and everyone else, and their wellordered home had always a cheering eﬀect on Levin, he felt a longing, now that
he was so dissatisﬁed with his own life, to get at that secret in Sviazhsky that
gave him such clearness, deﬁniteness, and good courage in life. Moreover, Levin
knew that at Sviazhsky’s he should meet the landowners of the neighborhood,
and it was particularly interesting for him just now to hear and take part in those
rural conversations concerning crops, laborers’ wages, and so on, which, he was
aware, are conventionally regarded as something very low, but which seemed to
him just now to constitute the one subject of importance. "It was not, perhaps, of
importance in the days of serfdom, and it may not be of importance in England. In
both cases the conditions of agriculture are ﬁrmly established; but among us now,
when everything has been turned upside down and is only just taking shape, the
question what form these conditions will take is the one question of importance
in Russia," thought Levin.
e shooting turned out to be worse than Levin had expected. e marsh
was dry and there were no grouse at all. He walked about the whole day and
only brought back three birds, but to make up for that—he brought back, as he
always did from shooting, an excellent appetite, excellent spirits, and that keen,
intellectual mood which with him always accompanied violent physical exertion.
And while out shooting, when he seemed to be thinking of nothing at all, suddenly
the old man and his family kept coming back to his mind, and the impression of
them seemed to claim not merely his aention, but the solution of some question
connected with them.
In the evening at tea, two landowners who had come about some business
connected with a wardship were of the party, and the interesting conversation
Levin had been looking forward to sprang up.
Levin was siing beside his hostess at the tea table, and was obliged to keep
up a conversation with her and her sister, who was siing opposite him. Madame
Sviazhskaya was a round-faced, fair-haired, rather short woman, all smiles and
dimples. Levin tried through her to get a solution of the weighty enigma her
husband presented to his mind; but he had not complete freedom of ideas, because
he was in an agony of embarrassment. is agony of embarrassment was due to
the fact that the sister-in-law was siing opposite to him, in a dress, specially put
on, as he fancied, for his beneﬁt, cut particularly open, in the shape of a trapeze,
on her white bosom. is quadrangular opening, in spite of the bosom’s being

ccxcix
very white, or just because it was very white, deprived Levin of the full use of
his faculties. He imagined, probably mistakenly, that this low-necked bodice had
been made on his account, and felt that he had no right to look at it, and tried not
to look at it; but he felt that he was to blame for the very fact of the low-necked
bodice having been made. It seemed to Levin that he had deceived someone,
that he ought to explain something, but that to explain it was impossible, and
for that reason he was continually blushing, was ill at ease and awkward. His
awkwardness infected the prey sister-in-law too. But their hostess appeared
not to observe this, and kept purposely drawing her into the conversation.
"You say," she said, pursuing the subject that had been started, "that my
husband cannot be interested in what’s Russian. It’s quite the contrary; he is
always in cheerful spirits abroad, but not as he is here. Here, he feels in his proper
place. He has so much to do, and he has the faculty of interesting himself in
everything. Oh, you’ve not been to see our school, have you?"
"I’ve seen it…. e lile house covered with ivy, isn’t it?"
"Yes; that’s Nastia’s work," she said, indicating her sister.
"You teach in it yoursel?" asked Levin, trying to look above the open neck,
but feeling that wherever he looked in that direction he should see it.
"Yes; I used to teach in it myself, and do teach still, but we have a ﬁrst-rate
schoolmistress now. And we’ve started gymnastic exercises."
"No, thank you, I won’t have any more tea," said Levin, and conscious of doing a rude thing, but incapable of continuing the conversation, he got up, blushing.
"I hear a very interesting conversation," he added, and walked to the other end of
the table, where Sviazhsky was siing with the two gentlemen of the neighborhood. Sviazhsky was siing sideways, with one elbow on the table, and a cup in
one hand, while with the other hand he gathered up his beard, held it to his nose
and let it drop again, as though he were smelling it. His brilliant black eyes were
looking straight at the excited country gentleman with gray whiskers, and apparently he derived amusement from his remarks. e gentleman was complaining
of the peasants. It was evident to Levin that Sviazhsky knew an answer to this
gentleman’s complaints, which would at once demolish his whole contention, but
that in his position he could not give uerance to this answer, and listened, not
without pleasure, to the landowner’s comic speeches.
e gentleman with the gray whiskers was obviously an inveterate adherent
of serfdom and a devoted agriculturist, who had lived all his life in the country.
Levin saw proofs of this in his dress, in the old-fashioned threadbare coat, obviously not his everyday aire, in his shrewd, deep-set eyes, in his idiomatic, ﬂuent
Russian, in the imperious tone that had become habitual from long use, and in the
resolute gestures of his large, red, sunburnt hands, with an old betrothal ring on
the lile ﬁnger.

ccc

Chapter 
"If I’d only the heart to throw up what’s been set going … such a lot of trouble
wasted … I’d turn my back on the whole business, sell up, go oﬀ like Nikolay
Ivanovitch … to hear La Belle Hélène," said the landowner, a pleasant smile lighting
up his shrewd old face.
"But you see you don’t throw it up," said Nikolay Ivanovitch Sviazhsky; "so
there must be something gained."
"e only gain is that I live in my own house, neither bought nor hired.
Besides, one keeps hoping the people will learn sense. ough, instead of that,
you’d never believe it—the drunkenness, the immorality! ey keep chopping and
changing their bits of land. Not a sight of a horse or a cow. e peasant’s dying
of hunger, but just go and take him on as a laborer, he’ll do his best to do you a
mischief, and then bring you up before the justice of the peace."
"But then you make complaints to the justice too," said Sviazhsky.
"I lodge complaints? Not for anything in the world! Such a talking, and
such a to-do, that one would have cause to regret it. At the works, for instance,
they pocketed the advance-money and made oﬀ. What did the justice do? Why,
acquied them. Nothing keeps them in order but their own communal court and
their village elder. He’ll ﬂog them in the good old style! But for that there’d be
nothing for it but to give it all up and run away."
Obviously the landowner was chaﬃng Sviazhsky, who, far from resenting
it, was apparently amused by it.
"But you see we manage our land without such extreme measures," said he,
smiling: "Levin and I and this gentleman."
He indicated the other landowner.
"Yes, the thing’s done at Mihail Petrovitch’s, but ask him how it’s done. Do
you call that a rational system?" said the landowner, obviously rather proud of
the word "rational."
"My system’s very simple," said Mihail Petrovitch, "thank God. All my management rests on geing the money ready for the autumn taxes, and the peasants
come to me, ‘Father, master, help us!’ Well, the peasants are all one’s neighbors;
one feels for them. So one advances them a third, but one says: ‘Remember, lads,
I have helped you, and you must help me when I need it—whether it’s the sowing
of the oats, or the haycuing, or the harvest’; and well, one agrees, so much for
each taxpayer—though there are dishonest ones among them too, it’s true."
Levin, who had long been familiar with these patriarchal methods, exchanged glances with Sviazhsky and interrupted Mihail Petrovitch, turning again
to the gentleman with the gray whiskers.
"en what do you think?" he asked; "what system is one to adopt nowa-

ccci
days?"
"Why, manage like Mihail Petrovitch, or let the land for half the crop or for
rent to the peasants; that one can do—only that’s just how the general prosperity
of the country is being ruined. Where the land with serf-labor and good management gave a yield of nine to one, on the half-crop system it yields three to one.
Russia has been ruined by the emancipation!"
Sviazhsky looked with smiling eyes at Levin, and even made a faint gesture of irony to him; but Levin did not think the landowner’s words absurd, he
understood them beer than he did Sviazhsky. A great deal more of what the
gentleman with the gray whiskers said to show in what way Russia was ruined
by the emancipation struck him indeed as very true, new to him, and quite incontestable. e landowner unmistakably spoke his own individual thought—a thing
that very rarely happens—and a thought to which he had been brought not by a
desire of ﬁnding some exercise for an idle brain, but a thought which had grown
up out of the conditions of his life, which he had brooded over in the solitude of
his village, and had considered in every aspect.
"e point is, don’t you see, that progress of every sort is only made by the
use of authority," he said, evidently wishing to show he was not without culture.
"Take the reforms of Peter, of Catherine, of Alexander. Take European history.
And progress in agriculture more than anything else—the potato, for instance, that
was introduced among us by force. e wooden plough too wasn’t always used. It
was introduced maybe in the days before the Empire, but it was probably brought
in by force. Now, in our own day, we landowners in the serf times used various
improvements in our husbandry: drying machines and thrashing machines, and
carting manure and all the modern implements—all that we brought into use by
our authority, and the peasants opposed it at ﬁrst, and ended by imitating us.
Now, by the abolition of serfdom we have been deprived of our authority; and so
our husbandry, where it had been raised to a high level, is bound to sink to the
most savage primitive condition. at’s how I see it."
"But why so? If it’s rational, you’ll be able to keep up the same system with
hired labor," said Sviazhsky.
"We’ve no power over them. With whom am I going to work the system,
allow me to ask?"
"ere it is—the labor force—the chief element in agriculture," thought
Levin.
"With laborers."
"e laborers won’t work well, and won’t work with good implements. Our
laborer can do nothing but get drunk like a pig, and when he’s drunk he ruins
everything you give him. He makes the horses ill with too much water, cuts good
harness, barters the tires of the wheels for drink, drops bits of iron into the thrash-

cccii
ing machine, so as to break it. He loathes the sight of anything that’s not aer his
fashion. And that’s how it is the whole level of husbandry has fallen. Lands gone
out of cultivation, overgrown with weeds, or divided among the peasants, and
where millions of bushels were raised you get a hundred thousand; the wealth of
the country has decreased. If the same thing had been done, but with care that…"
And he proceeded to unfold his own scheme of emancipation by means of
which these drawbacks might have been avoided.
is did not interest Levin, but when he had ﬁnished, Levin went back to his
ﬁrst position, and, addressing Sviazhsky, and trying to draw him into expressing
his serious opinion:-`
"at the standard of culture is falling, and that with our present relations
to the peasants there is no possibility of farming on a rational system to yield a
proﬁt—that’s perfectly true," said he.
"I don’t believe it," Sviazhsky replied quite seriously; "all I see is that we
don’t know how to cultivate the land, and that our system of agriculture in the
serf days was by no means too high, but too low. We have no machines, no good
stock, no eﬃcient supervision; we don’t even know how to keep accounts. Ask
any landowner; he won’t be able to tell you what crop’s proﬁtable, and what’s
not."
"Italian bookkeeping," said the gentleman of the gray whiskers ironically.
"You may keep your books as you like, but if they spoil everything for you, there
won’t be any proﬁt."
"Why do they spoil things? A poor thrashing machine, or your Russian
presser, they will break, but my steam press they don’t break. A wretched Russian
nag they’ll ruin, but keep good dray-horses—they won’t ruin them. And so it is
all round. We must raise our farming to a higher level."
"Oh, if one only had the means to do it, Nikolay Ivanovitch! It’s all very
well for you; but for me, with a son to keep at the university, lads to be educated
at the high school—how am I going to buy these dray-horses?"
"Well, that’s what the land banks are for."
"To get what’s le me sold by auction? No, thank you."
"I don’t agree that it’s necessary or possible to raise the level of agriculture
still higher," said Levin. "I devote myself to it, and I have means, but I can do
nothing. As to the banks, I don’t know to whom they’re any good. For my part,
anyway, whatever I’ve spent money on in the way of husbandry, it has been a
loss: stock—a loss, machinery—a loss."
"at’s true enough," the gentleman with the gray whiskers chimed in, positively laughing with satisfaction.
"And I’m not the only one," pursued Levin. "I mix with all the neighboring
landowners, who are cultivating their land on a rational system; they all, with rare

ccciii
exceptions, are doing so at a loss. Come, tell us how does your land do—does it
pay?" said Levin, and at once in Sviazhsky’s eyes he detected that ﬂeeting expression of alarm which he had noticed whenever he had tried to penetrate beyond
the outer chambers of Sviazhsky’s mind.
Moreover, this question on Levin’s part was not quite in good faith. Madame
Sviazhskaya had just told him at tea that they had that summer invited a German
expert in bookkeeping from Moscow, who for a consideration of ﬁve hundred
roubles had investigated the management of their property, and found that it was
costing them a loss of three thousand odd roubles. She did not remember the
precise sum, but it appeared that the German had worked it out to the fraction of
a farthing.
e gray-whiskered landowner smiled at the mention of the proﬁts of Sviazhsky’s famling, obviously aware how much gain his neighbor and marshal was
likely to be making.
"Possibly it does not pay," answered Sviazhsky. "at merely proves either
that I’m a bad manager, or that I’ve sunk my capital for the increase of my rents."
"Oh, rent!" Levin cried with horror. "Rent there may be in Europe, where
land has been improved by the labor put into it, but with us all the land is deteriorating from the labor put into it—in other words they’re working it out; so there’s
no question of rent."
"How no rent? It’s a law."
"en we’re outside the law; rent explains nothing for us, but simply muddles us. No, tell me how there can be a theory of rent?…"
"Will you have some junket? Masha, pass us some junket or raspberries."
He turned to his wife. "Extraordinarily late the raspberries are lasting this year."
And in the happiest frame of mind Sviazhsky got up and walked oﬀ, apparently supposing the conversation to have ended at the very point when to Levin
it seemed that it was only just beginning.
Having lost his antagonist, Levin continued the conversation with the graywhiskered landowner, trying to prove to him that all the diﬃculty arises from the
fact that we don’t ﬁnd out the peculiarities and habits of our laborer; but the
landowner, like all men who think independently and in isolation, was slow in
taking in any other person’s idea, and particularly partial to his own. He stuck to
it that the Russian peasant is a swine and likes swinishness, and that to get him
out of his swinishness one must have authority, and there is none; one must have
the stick, and we have become so liberal that we have all of a sudden replaced the
stick that served us for a thousand years by lawyers and model prisons, where
the worthless, stinking peasant is fed on good soup and has a ﬁxed allowance of
cubic feet of air.
"What makes you think," said Levin, trying to get back to the question, "that

ccciv
it’s impossible to ﬁnd some relation to the laborer in which the labor would become productive?"
"at never could be so with the Russian peasantry; we’ve no power over
them," answered the landowner.
"How can new conditions be found?" said Sviazhsky. Having eaten some
junket and lighted a cigaree, he came back to the discussion. "All possible relations to the labor force have been deﬁned and studied," he said. "e relic of
barbarism, the primitive commune with each guarantee for all, will disappear of
itself; serfdom has been abolished—there remains nothing but free labor, and its
forms are ﬁxed and ready made, and must be adopted. Permanent hands, daylaborers, rammers—you can’t get out of those forms."
"But Europe is dissatisﬁed with these forms."
"Dissatisﬁed, and seeking new ones. And will ﬁnd them, in all probability."
"at’s just what I was meaning," answered Levin. "Why shouldn’t we seek
them for ourselves?"
"Because it would be just like inventing afresh the means for constructing
railways. ey are ready, invented."
"But if they don’t do for us, if they’re stupid?" said Levin.
And again he detected the expression of alarm in the eyes of Sviazhsky.
"Oh, yes; we’ll bury the world under our caps! We’ve found the secret Europe was seeking for! I’ve heard all that; but, excuse me, do you know all that’s
been done in Europe on the question of the organization of labor?"
"No, very lile."
"at question is now absorbing the best minds in Europe. e SchulzeDelitsch movement…. And then all this enormous literature of the labor question,
the most liberal Lassalle movement … the Mulhausen experiment? at’s a fact
by now, as you’re probably aware."
"I have some idea of it, but very vague."
"No, you only say that; no doubt you know all about it as well as I do. I’m not
a professor of sociology, of course, but it interested me, and really, if it interests
you, you ought to study it."
"But what conclusion have they come to?"
"Excuse me…"
e two neighbors had risen, and Sviazhsky, once more checking Levin in
his inconvenient habit of peeping into what was beyond the outer chambers of
his mind, went to see his guests out.

Chapter 

cccv
Levin was insuﬀerably bored that evening with the ladies; he was stirred as he
had never been before by the idea that the dissatisfaction he was feeling with
his system of managing his land was not an exceptional case, but the general
condition of things in Russia; that the organization of some relation of the laborers
to the soil in which they would work, as with the peasant he had met half-way
to the Sviazhskys’, was not a dream, but a problem which must be solved. And
it seemed to him that the problem could be solved, and that he ought to try and
solve it.
Aer saying good-night to the ladies, and promising to stay the whole of the
next day, so as to make an expedition on horseback with them to see an interesting
ruin in the crown forest, Levin went, before going to bed, into his host’s study to
get the books on the labor question that Sviazhsky had oﬀered him. Sviazhsky’s
study was a huge room, surrounded by bookcases and with two tables in it—one a
massive writing table, standing in the middle of the room, and the other a round
table, covered with recent numbers of reviews and journals in diﬀerent languages,
ranged like the rays of a star round the lamp. On the writing table was a stand of
drawers marked with gold leering, and full of papers of various sorts.
Sviazhsky took out the books, and sat down in a rocking-chair.
"What are you looking at there?" he said to Levin, who was standing at the
round table looking through the reviews.
"Oh, yes, there’s a very interesting article here," said Sviazhsky of the review
Levin was holding in his hand. "It appears," he went on, with eager interest, "that
Friedrich was not, aer all, the person chieﬂy responsible for the partition of
Poland. It is proved…"
And with his characteristic clearness, he summed up those new, very important, and interesting revelations. Although Levin was engrossed at the moment
by his ideas about the problem of the land, he wondered, as he heard Sviazhsky:
"What is there inside of him? And why, why is he interested in the partition of
Poland?" When Sviazhsky had ﬁnished, Levin could not help asking: "Well, and
what then?" But there was nothing to follow. It was simply interesting that it had
been proved to be so and so. But Sviazhsky did not explain, and saw no need to
explain why it was interesting to him.
"Yes, but I was very much interested by your irritable neighbor," said Levin,
sighing. "He’s a clever fellow, and said a lot that was true."
"Oh, get along with you! An inveterate supporter of serfdom at heart, like
all of them!" said Sviazhsky.
"Whose marshal you are."
"Yes, only I marshal them in the other direction," said Sviazhsky, laughing.
"I’ll tell you what interests me very much," said Levin. "He’s right that our
system, that’s to say of rational farming, doesn’t answer, that the only thing that

cccvi
answers is the money-lender system, like that meek-looking gentleman’s, or else
the very simplest…. Whose fault is it?"
"Our own, of course. Besides, it’s not true that it doesn’t answer. It answers
with Vassiltchikov."
"A factory…"
"But I really don’t know what it is you are surprised at. e people are
at such a low stage of rational and moral development, that it’s obvious they’re
bound to oppose everything that’s strange to them. In Europe, a rational system
answers because the people are educated; it follows that we must educate the
people—that’s all."
"But how are we to educate the people?"
"To educate the people three things are needed: schools, and schools, and
schools.
"But you said yourself the people are at such a low stage of material development: what help are schools for that?"
"Do you know, you remind me of the story of the advice given to the sick
man—You should try purgative medicine. Taken: worse. Try leeches. Tried them:
worse. Well, then, there’s nothing le but to pray to God. Tried it: worse. at’s
just how it is with us. I say political economy; you say—worse. I say socialism:
worse. Education: worse."
"But how do schools help maers?"
"ey give the peasant fresh wants."
"Well, that’s a thing I’ve never understood," Levin replied with heat. "In
what way are schools going to help the people to improve their material position? You say schools, education, will give them fresh wants. So much the worse,
since they won’t be capable of satisfying them. And in what way a knowledge of
addition and subtraction and the catechism is going to improve their material condition, I never could make out. e day before yesterday, I met a peasant woman
in the evening with a lile baby, and asked her where she was going. She said she
was going to the wise woman; her boy had screaming ﬁts, so she was taking him
to be doctored. I asked, ‘Why, how does the wise woman cure screaming ﬁts?’
‘She puts the child on the hen-roost and repeats some charm….’"
"Well, you’re saying it yourself! What’s wanted to prevent her taking her
child to the hen-roost to cure it of screaming ﬁts is just…" Sviazhsky said, smiling
good-humoredly.
"Oh, no!" said Levin with annoyance; "that method of doctoring I merely
meant as a simile for doctoring the people with schools. e people are poor and
ignorant—that we see as surely as the peasant woman sees the baby is ill because
it screams. But in what way this trouble of poverty and ignorance is to be cured by
schools is as incomprehensible as how the hen-roost aﬀects the screaming. What

cccvii
has to be cured is what makes him poor."
"Well, in that, at least, you’re in agreement with Spencer, whom you dislike
so much. He says, too, that education may be the consequence of greater prosperity and comfort, of more frequent washing, as he says, but not of being able to
read and write…"
"Well, then, I’m very glad—or the contrary, very sorry, that I’m in agreement
with Spencer; only I’ve known it a long while. Schools can do no good; what will
do good is an economic organization in which the people will become richer, will
have more leisure—and then there will be schools."
"Still, all over Europe now schools are obligatory."
"And how far do you agree with Spencer yourself about it?" asked Levin.
But there was a gleam of alarm in Sviazhsky’s eyes, and he said smiling:
"No; that screaming story is positively capital! Did you really hear it yoursel?"
Levin saw that he was not to discover the connection between this man’s
life and his thoughts. Obviously he did not care in the least what his reasoning led
him to; all he wanted was the process of reasoning. And he did not like it when
the process of reasoning brought him into a blind alley. at was the only thing
he disliked, and avoided by changing the conversation to something agreeable
and amusing.
All the impressions of the day, beginning with the impression made by the
old peasant, which served, as it were, as the fundamental basis of all the conceptions and ideas of the day, threw Levin into violent excitement. is dear good
Sviazhsky, keeping a stock of ideas simply for social purposes, and obviously having some other principles hidden from Levin, while with the crowd, whose name
is legion, he guided public opinion by ideas he did not share; that irascible country
gentleman, perfectly correct in the conclusions that he had been worried into by
life, but wrong in his exasperation against a whole class, and that the best class in
Russia; his own dissatisfaction with the work he had been doing, and the vague
hope of ﬁnding a remedy for all this—all was blended in a sense of inward turmoil,
and anticipation of some solution near at hand.
Le alone in the room assigned him, lying on a spring maress that yielded
unexpectedly at every movement of his arm or his leg, Levin did not fall asleep for
a long while. Not one conversation with Sviazhsky, though he had said a great
deal that was clever, had interested Levin; but the conclusions of the irascible
landowner required consideration. Levin could not help recalling every word he
had said, and in imagination amending his own replies.
"Yes, I ought to have said to him: You say that our husbandry does not answer because the peasant hates improvements, and that they must be forced on
him by authority. If no system of husbandry answered at all without these im-

cccviii
provements, you would be quite right. But the only system that does answer is
where laborer is working in accordance with his habits, just as on the old peasant’s land half-way here. Your and our general dissatisfaction with the system
shows that either we are to blame or the laborers. We have gone our way—the
European way—a long while, without asking ourselves about the qualities of our
labor force. Let us try to look upon the labor force not as an abstract force, but as
the Russian peasant with his instincts, and we shall arrange our system of culture
in accordance with that. Imagine, I ought to have said to him, that you have the
same system as the old peasant has, that you have found means of making your
laborers take an interest in the success of the work, and have found the happy
mean in the way of improvements which they will admit, and you will, without
exhausting the soil, get twice or three times the yield you got before. Divide it
in halves, give half as the share of labor, the surplus le you will be greater, and
the share of labor will be greater too. And to do this one must lower the standard
of husbandry and interest the laborers in its success. How to do this?—that’s a
maer of detail; but undoubtedly it can be done."
is idea threw Levin into a great excitement. He did not sleep half the
night, thinking over in detail the puing of his idea into practice. He had not
intended to go away next day, but he now determined to go home early in the
morning. Besides, the sister-in-law with her low-necked bodice aroused in him a
feeling akin to shame and remorse for some uerly base action. Most important of
all—he must get back without delay: he would have to make haste to put his new
project to the peasants before the sowing of the winter wheat, so that the sowing
might be undertaken on a new basis. He had made up his mind to revolutionize
his whole system.

Chapter 
e carrying out of Levin’s plan presented many diﬃculties; but he struggled on,
doing his utmost, and aained a result which, though not what he desired, was
enough to enable him, without self-deception, to believe that the aempt was
worth the trouble. One of the chief diﬃculties was that the process of cultivating
the land was in full swing, that it was impossible to stop everything and begin it
all again from the beginning, and the machine had to be mended while in motion.
When on the evening that he arrived home he informed the bailiﬀ of his
plans, the laer with visible pleasure agreed with what he said so long as he was
pointing out that all that had been done up to that time was stupid and useless.
e bailiﬀ said that he had said so a long while ago, but no heed had been paid
him. But as for the proposal made by Levin—to take a part as shareholder with

cccix
his laborers in each agricultural undertaking—at this the bailiﬀ simply expressed
a profound despondency, and oﬀered no deﬁnite opinion, but began immediately
talking of the urgent necessity of carrying the remaining sheaves of rye the next
day, and of sending the men out for the second ploughing, so that Levin felt that
this was not the time for discussing it.
On beginning to talk to the peasants about it, and making a proposition
to cede them the land on new terms, he came into collision with the same great
diﬃculty that they were so much absorbed by the current work of the day, that
they had not time to consider the advantages and disadvantages of the proposed
scheme.
e simple-hearted Ivan, the cowherd, seemed completely to grasp Levin’s
proposal—that he should with his family take a share of the proﬁts of the caleyard—and he was in complete sympathy with the plan. But when Levin hinted
at the future advantages, Ivan’s face expressed alarm and regret that he could not
hear all he had to say, and he made haste to ﬁnd himself some task that would
admit of no delay: he either snatched up the fork to pitch the hay out of the pens,
or ran to get water or to clear out the dung.
Another diﬃculty lay in the invincible disbelief of the peasant that a
landowner’s object could be anything else than a desire to squeeze all he could
out of them. ey were ﬁrmly convinced that his real aim (whatever he might say
to them) would always be in what he did not say to them. And they themselves,
in giving their opinion, said a great deal but never said what was their real object.
Moreover (Levin felt that the irascible landowner had been right) the peasants
made their ﬁrst and unalterable condition of any agreement whatever that they
should not be forced to any new methods of tillage of any kind, nor to use new
implements. ey agreed that the modern plough ploughed beer, that the scariﬁer did the work more quickly, but they found thousands of reasons that made
it out of the question for them to use either of them; and though he had accepted
the conviction that he would have to lower the standard of cultivation, he felt
sorry to give up improved methods, the advantages of which were so obvious.
But in spite of all these diﬃculties he got his way, and by autumn the system was
working, or at least so it seemed to him.
At ﬁrst Levin had thought of giving up the whole farming of the land just as
it was to the peasants, the laborers, and the bailiﬀ on new conditions of partnership; but he was very soon convinced that this was impossible, and determined
to divide it up. e cale-yard, the garden, hay ﬁelds, and arable land, divided
into several parts, had to be made into separate lots. e simple-hearted cowherd,
Ivan, who, Levin fancied, understood the maer beer than any of them, collecting together a gang of workers to help him, principally of his own family, became
a partner in the cale-yard. A distant part of the estate, a tract of waste land that

cccx
had lain fallow for eight years, was with the help of the clever carpenter, Fyodor
Ryezunov, taken by six families of peasants on new conditions of partnership,
and the peasant Shuraev took the management of all the vegetable gardens on
the same terms. e remainder of the land was still worked on the old system,
but these three associated partnerships were the ﬁrst step to a new organization
of the whole, and they completely took up Levin’s time.
It is true that in the cale-yard things went no beer than before, and Ivan
strenuously opposed warm housing for the cows and buer made of fresh cream,
aﬃrming that cows require less food if kept cold, and that buer is more proﬁtable
made from sour cream, and he asked for wages just as under the old system, and
took not the slightest interest in the fact that the money he received was not wages
but an advance out of his future share in the proﬁts.
It is true that Fyodor Ryezunov’s company did not plough over the ground
twice before sowing, as had been agreed, justifying themselves on the plea that
the time was too short. It is true that the peasants of the same company, though
they had agreed to work the land on new conditions, always spoke of the land,
not as held in partnership, but as rented for half the crop, and more than once
the peasants and Ryezunov himself said to Levin, "If you would take a rent for
the land, it would save you trouble, and we should be more free." Moreover the
same peasants kept puing oﬀ, on various excuses, the building of a caleyard
and barn on the land as agreed upon, and delayed doing it till the winter.
It is true that Shuraev would have liked to let out the kitchen gardens he
had undertaken in small lots to the peasants. He evidently quite misunderstood,
and apparently intentionally misunderstood, the conditions upon which the land
had been given to him.
Oen, too, talking to the peasants and explaining to them all the advantages
of the plan, Levin felt that the peasants heard nothing but the sound of his voice,
and were ﬁrmly resolved, whatever he might say, not to let themselves be taken in.
He felt this especially when he talked to the cleverest of the peasants, Ryezunov,
and detected the gleam in Ryezunov’s eyes which showed so plainly both ironical
amusement at Levin, and the ﬁrm conviction that, if any one were to be taken in,
it would not be he, Ryezunov. But in spite of all this Levin thought the system
worked, and that by keeping accounts strictly and insisting on his own way, he
would prove to them in the future the advantages of the arrangement, and then
the system would go of itself.
ese maers, together with the management of the land still le on his
hands, and the indoor work over his book, so engrossed Levin the whole summer
that he scarcely ever went out shooting. At the end of August he heard that the
Oblonskys had gone away to Moscow, from their servant who brought back the
side-saddle. He felt that in not answering Darya Alexandrovna’s leer he had

cccxi
by his rudeness, of which he could not think without a ﬂush of shame, burned
his ships, and that he would never go and see them again. He had been just as
rude with the Sviazhskys, leaving them without saying good-bye. But he would
never go to see them again either. He did not care about that now. e business
of reorganizing the farming of his land absorbed him as completely as though
there would never be anything else in his life. He read the books lent him by
Sviazhsky, and copying out what he had not got, he read both the economic and
socialistic books on the subject, but, as he had anticipated, found nothing bearing
on the scheme he had undertaken. In the books on political economy—in Mill,
for instance, whom he studied ﬁrst with great ardor, hoping every minute to ﬁnd
an answer to the questions that were engrossing him—he found laws deduced
from the condition of land culture in Europe; but he did not see why these laws,
which did not apply in Russia, must be general. He saw just the same thing in the
socialistic books: either they were the beautiful but impracticable fantasies which
had fascinated him when he was a student, or they were aempts at improving,
rectifying the economic position in which Europe was placed, with which the
system of land tenure in Russia had nothing in common. Political economy told
him that the laws by which the wealth of Europe had been developed, and was
developing, were universal and unvarying. Socialism told him that development
along these lines leads to ruin. And neither of them gave an answer, or even
a hint, in reply to the question what he, Levin, and all the Russian peasants and
landowners, were to do with their millions of hands and millions of acres, to make
them as productive as possible for the common weal.
Having once taken the subject up, he read conscientiously everything bearing on it, and intended in the autumn to go abroad to study land systems on the
spot, in order that he might not on this question be confronted with what so often met him on various subjects. Oen, just as he was beginning to understand
the idea in the mind of anyone he was talking to, and was beginning to explain
his own, he would suddenly be told: "But Kauﬀmann, but Jones, but Dubois, but
Michelli? You haven’t read them: they’ve thrashed that question out thoroughly."
He saw now distinctly that Kauﬀmann and Michelli had nothing to tell him.
He knew what he wanted. He saw that Russia has splendid land, splendid laborers,
and that in certain cases, as at the peasant’s on the way to Sviazhsky’s, the produce
raised by the laborers and the land is great—in the majority of cases when capital
is applied in the European way the produce is small, and that this simply arises
from the fact that the laborers want to work and work well only in their own
peculiar way, and that this antagonism is not incidental but invariable, and has its
roots in the national spirit. He thought that the Russian people whose task it was
to colonize and cultivate vast tracts of unoccupied land, consciously adhered, till
all their land was occupied, to the methods suitable to their purpose, and that their

cccxii
methods were by no means so bad as was generally supposed. And he wanted to
prove this theoretically in his book and practically on his land.

Chapter 
At the end of September the timber had been carted for building the caleyard
on the land that had been alloed to the association of peasants, and the buer
from the cows was sold and the proﬁts divided. In practice the system worked
capitally, or, at least, so it seemed to Levin. In order to work out the whole subject
theoretically and to complete his book, which, in Levin’s daydreams, was not
merely to eﬀect a revolution in political economy, but to annihilate that science
entirely and to lay the foundation of a new science of the relation of the people to
the soil, all that was le to do was to make a tour abroad, and to study on the spot
all that had been done in the same direction, and to collect conclusive evidence
that all that had been done there was not what was wanted. Levin was only
waiting for the delivery of his wheat to receive the money for it and go abroad.
But the rains began, preventing the harvesting of the corn and potatoes le in the
ﬁelds, and puing a stop to all work, even to the delivery of the wheat.
e mud was impassable along the roads; two mills were carried away, and
the weather got worse and worse.
On the th of September the sun came out in the morning, and hoping
for ﬁne weather, Levin began making ﬁnal preparations for his journey. He gave
orders for the wheat to be delivered, sent the bailiﬀ to the merchant to get the
money owing him, and went out himself to give some ﬁnal directions on the estate
before seing oﬀ.
Having ﬁnished all his business, soaked through with the streams of water
which kept running down the leather behind his neck and his gaiters, but in the
keenest and most conﬁdent temper, Levin returned homewards in the evening.
e weather had become worse than ever towards evening; the hail lashed the
drenched mare so cruelly that she went along sideways, shaking her head and
ears; but Levin was all right under his hood, and he looked cheerfully about him
at the muddy streams running under the wheels, at the drops hanging on every
bare twig, at the whiteness of the patch of unmelted hailstones on the planks of
the bridge, at the thick layer of still juicy, ﬂeshy leaves that lay heaped up about
the stripped elm-tree. In spite of the gloominess of nature around him, he felt
peculiarly eager. e talks he had been having with the peasants in the further
village had shown that they were beginning to get used to their new position. e
old servant to whose hut he had gone to get dry evidently approved of Levin’s
plan, and of his own accord proposed to enter the partnership by the purchase of

cccxiii
cale.
"I have only to go stubbornly on towards my aim, and I shall aain my end,"
thought Levin; "and it’s something to work and take trouble for. is is not a matter of myself individually; the question of the public welfare comes into it. e
whole system of culture, the chief element in the condition of the people, must be
completely transformed. Instead of poverty, general prosperity and content; instead of hostility, harmony and unity of interests. In short, a bloodless revolution,
but a revolution of the greatest magnitude, beginning in the lile circle of our district, then the province, then Russia, the whole world. Because a just idea cannot
but be fruitful. Yes, it’s an aim worth working for. And its being me, Kostya Levin,
who went to a ball in a black tie, and was refused by the Shtcherbatskaya girl, and
who was intrinsically such a pitiful, worthless creature—that proves nothing; I
feel sure Franklin felt just as worthless, and he too had no faith in himself, thinking of himself as a whole. at means nothing. And he too, most likely, had an
Agafea Mihalovna to whom he conﬁded his secrets."
Musing on such thoughts Levin reached home in the darkness.
e bailiﬀ, who had been to the merchant, had come back and brought part
of the money for the wheat. An agreement had been made with the old servant,
and on the road the bailiﬀ had learned that everywhere the corn was still standing
in the ﬁelds, so that his one hundred and sixty shocks that had not been carried
were nothing in comparison with the losses of others.
Aer dinner Levin was siing, as he usually did, in an easy chair with a
book, and as he read he went on thinking of the journey before him in connection
with his book. Today all the signiﬁcance of his book rose before him with special
distinctness, and whole periods ranged themselves in his mind in illustration of
his theories. "I must write that down," he thought. "at ought to form a brief
introduction, which I thought unnecessary before." He got up to go to his writing
table, and Laska, lying at his feet, got up too, stretching and looking at him as
though to inquire where to go. But he had not time to write it down, for the head
peasants had come round, and Levin went out into the hall to them.
Aer his levee, that is to say, giving directions about the labors of the next
day, and seeing all the peasants who had business with him, Levin went back to
his study and sat down to work.
Laska lay under the table; Agafea Mihalovna seled herself in her place
with her stocking.
Aer writing for a lile while, Levin suddenly thought with exceptional
vividness of Kiy, her refusal, and their last meeting. He got up and began walking
about the room.
"What’s the use of being dreary?" said Agafea Mihalovna. "Come, why do
you stay on at home? You ought to go to some warm springs, especially now

cccxiv
you’re ready for the journey."
"Well, I am going away the day aer tomorrow, Agafea Mihalovna; I must
ﬁnish my work."
"ere, there, your work, you say! As if you hadn’t done enough for the
peasants! Why, as ’tis, they’re saying, ‘Your master will be geing some honor
from the Tsar for it.’ Indeed and it is a strange thing; why need you worry about
the peasants?"
"I’m not worrying about them; I’m doing it for my own good."
Agafea Mihalovna knew every detail of Levin’s plans for his land. Levin
oen put his views before her in all their complexity, and not uncommonly he
argued with her and did not agree with her comments. But on this occasion she
entirely misinterpreted what he had said.
"Of one’s soul’s salvation we all know and must think before all else," she
said with a sigh. "Parfen Denisitch now, for all he was no scholar, he died a death
that God grant every one of us the like," she said, referring to a servant who had
died recently. "Took the sacrament and all."
"at’s not what I mean," said he. "I mean that I’m acting for my own advantage. It’s all the beer for me if the peasants do their work beer."
"Well, whatever you do, if he’s a lazy good-for-nought, everything’ll be at
sixes and sevens. If he has a conscience, he’ll work, and if not, there’s no doing
anything."
"Oh, come, you say yourself Ivan has begun looking aer the cale beer."
"All I say is," answered Agafea Mihalovna, evidently not speaking at random,
but in strict sequence of idea, "that you ought to get married, that’s what I say."
Agafea Mihalovna’s allusion to the very subject he had only just been thinking about, hurt and stung him. Levin scowled, and without answering her, he sat
down again to his work, repeating to himself all that he had been thinking of the
real signiﬁcance of that work. Only at intervals he listened in the stillness to the
click of Agafea Mihalovna’s needles, and recollecting what he did not want to
remember, he frowned again.
At nine o’clock they heard the bell and the faint vibration of a carriage over
the mud.
"Well, here’s visitors come to us, and you won’t be dull," said Agafea Mihalovna, geing up and going to the door. But Levin overtook her. His work was
not going well now, and he was glad of a visitor, whoever it might be.

Chapter 
Running halfway down the staircase, Levin caught a sound he knew, a familiar

cccxv
cough in the hall. But he heard it indistinctly through the sound of his own footsteps, and hoped he was mistaken. en he caught sight of a long, bony, familiar
ﬁgure, and now it seemed there was no possibility of mistake; and yet he still
went on hoping that this tall man taking oﬀ his fur cloak and coughing was not
his brother Nikolay.
Levin loved his brother, but being with him was always a torture. Just now,
when Levin, under the inﬂuence of the thoughts that had come to him, and Agafea
Mihalovna’s hint, was in a troubled and uncertain humor, the meeting with his
brother that he had to face seemed particularly diﬃcult. Instead of a lively, healthy
visitor, some outsider who would, he hoped, cheer him up in his uncertain humor,
he had to see his brother, who knew him through and through, who would call
forth all the thoughts nearest his heart, would force him to show himself fully.
And that he was not disposed to do.
Angry with himself for so base a feeling, Levin ran into the hall; as soon
as he had seen his brother close, this feeling of selﬁsh disappointment vanished
instantly and was replaced by pity. Terrible as his brother Nikolay had been before
in his emaciation and sickliness, now he looked still more emaciated, still more
wasted. He was a skeleton covered with skin.
He stood in the hall, jerking his long thin neck, and pulling the scarf oﬀ it,
and smiled a strange and pitiful smile. When he saw that smile, submissive and
humble, Levin felt something clutching at his throat.
"You see, I’ve come to you," said Nikolay in a thick voice, never for one
second taking his eyes oﬀ his brother’s face. "I’ve been meaning to a long while,
but I’ve been unwell all the time. Now I’m ever so much beer," he said, rubbing
his beard with his big thin hands.
"Yes, yes!" answered Levin. And he felt still more frightened when, kissing
him, he felt with his lips the dryness of his brother’s skin and saw close to him
his big eyes, full of a strange light.
A few weeks before, Konstantin Levin had wrien to his brother that
through the sale of the small part of the property, that had remained undivided,
there was a sum of about two thousand roubles to come to him as his share.
Nikolay said that he had come now to take this money and, what was more
important, to stay a while in the old nest, to get in touch with the earth, so as to
renew his strength like the heroes of old for the work that lay before him. In spite
of his exaggerated stoop, and the emaciation that was so striking from his height,
his movements were as rapid and abrupt as ever. Levin led him into his study.
His brother dressed with particular care—a thing he never used to
do—combed his scanty, lank hair, and, smiling, went upstairs.
He was in the most aﬀectionate and good-humored mood, just as Levin often remembered him in childhood. He even referred to Sergey Ivanovitch without

cccxvi
rancor. When he saw Agafea Mihalovna, he made jokes with her and asked after the old servants. e news of the death of Parfen Denisitch made a painful
impression on him. A look of fear crossed his face, but he regained his serenity
immediately.
"Of course he was quite old," he said, and changed the subject. "Well, I’ll
spend a month or two with you, and then I’m oﬀ to Moscow. Do you know,
Myakov has promised me a place there, and I’m going into the service. Now I’m
going to arrange my life quite diﬀerently," he went on. "You know I got rid of that
woman."
"Marya Nikolaevna? Why, what for?"
"Oh, she was a horrid woman! She caused me all sorts of worries." But he
did not say what the annoyances were. He could not say that he had cast oﬀ
Marya Nikolaevna because the tea was weak, and, above all, because she would
look aer him, as though he were an invalid.
"Besides, I want to turn over a new leaf completely now. I’ve done silly
things, of course, like everyone else, but money’s the last consideration; I don’t
regret it. So long as there’s health, and my health, thank God, is quite restored."
Levin listened and racked his brains, but could think of nothing to say. Nikolay probably felt the same; he began questioning his brother about his aﬀairs;
and Levin was glad to talk about himself, because then he could speak without
hypocrisy. He told his brother of his plans and his doings.
His brother listened, but evidently he was not interested by it.
ese two men were so akin, so near each other, that the slightest gesture,
the tone of voice, told both more than could be said in words.
Both of them now had only one thought—the illness of Nikolay and the
nearness of his death—which stiﬂed all else. But neither of them dared to speak
of it, and so whatever they said—not uering the one thought that ﬁlled their
minds—was all falsehood. Never had Levin been so glad when the evening was
over and it was time to go to bed. Never with any outside person, never on any
oﬃcial visit had he been so unnatural and false as he was that evening. And the
consciousness of this unnaturalness, and the remorse he felt at it, made him even
more unnatural. He wanted to weep over his dying, dearly loved brother, and he
had to listen and keep on talking of how he meant to live.
As the house was damp, and only one bedroom had been kept heated, Levin
put his brother to sleep in his own bedroom behind a screen.
His brother got into bed, and whether he slept or did not sleep, tossed about
like a sick man, coughed, and when he could not get his throat clear, mumbled
something. Sometimes when his breathing was painful, he said, "Oh, my God!"
Sometimes when he was choking he muered angrily, "Ah, the devil!" Levin could
not sleep for a long while, hearing him. His thoughts were of the most various,

cccxvii
but the end of all his thoughts was the same—death. Death, the inevitable end
of all, for the ﬁrst time presented itself to him with irresistible force. And death,
which was here in this loved brother, groaning half asleep and from habit calling
without distinction on God and the devil, was not so remote as it had hitherto
seemed to him. It was in himself too, he felt that. If not today, tomorrow, if not
tomorrow, in thirty years, wasn’t it all the same! And what was this inevitable
death—he did not know, had never thought about it, and what was more, had not
the power, had not the courage to think about it.
"I work, I want to do something, but I had forgoen it must all end; I had
forgoen—death."
He sat on his bed in the darkness, crouched up, hugging his knees, and
holding his breath from the strain of thought, he pondered. But the more intensely
he thought, the clearer it became to him that it was indubitably so, that in reality,
looking upon life, he had forgoen one lile fact—that death will come, and all
ends; that nothing was even worth beginning, and that there was no helping it
anyway. Yes, it was awful, but it was so.
"But I am alive still. Now what’s to be done? what’s to be done?" he said in
despair. He lighted a candle, got up cautiously and went to the looking-glass, and
began looking at his face and hair. Yes, there were gray hairs about his temples.
He opened his mouth. His back teeth were beginning to decay. He bared his muscular arms. Yes, there was strength in them. But Nikolay, who lay there breathing
with what was le of lungs, had had a strong, healthy body too. And suddenly
he recalled how they used to go to bed together as children, and how they only
waited till Fyodor Bogdanitch was out of the room to ﬂing pillows at each other
and laugh, laugh irrepressibly, so that even their awe of Fyodor Bogdanitch could
not check the eﬀervescing, overbrimming sense of life and happiness. "And now
that bent, hollow chest … and I, not knowing what will become of me, or wherefore…"
"K…ha! K…ha! Damnation! Why do you keep ﬁdgeting, why don’t you go
to sleep?" his brother’s voice called to him.
"Oh, I don’t know, I’m not sleepy."
"I have had a good sleep, I’m not in a sweat now. Just see, feel my shirt; it’s
not wet, is it?"
Levin felt, withdrew behind the screen, and put out the candle, but for a
long while he could not sleep. e question how to live had hardly begun to grow
a lile clearer to him, when a new, insoluble question presented itself—death.
"Why, he’s dying—yes, he’ll die in the spring, and how help him? What can
I say to him? What do I know about it? I’d even forgoen that it was at all."

cccxviii

Chapter 
Levin had long before made the observation that when one is uncomfortable with
people from their being excessively amenable and meek, one is apt very soon aer
to ﬁnd things intolerable from their touchiness and irritability. He felt that this
was how it would be with his brother. And his brother Nikolay’s gentleness did
in fact not last out for long. e very next morning he began to be irritable, and
seemed doing his best to ﬁnd fault with his brother, aacking him on his tenderest
points.
Levin felt himself to blame, and could not set things right. He felt that if
they had both not kept up appearances, but had spoken, as it is called, from the
heart—that is to say, had said only just what they were thinking and feeling—they
would simply have looked into each other’s faces, and Konstantin could only have
said, "You’re dying, you’re dying!" and Nikolay could only have answered, "I know
I’m dying, but I’m afraid, I’m afraid, I’m afraid!" And they could have said nothing
more, if they had said only what was in their hearts. But life like that was impossible, and so Konstantin tried to do what he had been trying to do all his life, and
never could learn to do, though, as far as he could observe, many people knew so
well how to do it, and without it there was no living at all. He tried to say what
he was not thinking, but he felt continually that it had a ring of falsehood, that
his brother detected him in it, and was exasperated at it.
e third day Nikolay induced his brother to explain his plan to him again,
and began not merely aacking it, but intentionally confounding it with communism.
"You’ve simply borrowed an idea that’s not your own, but you’ve distorted
it, and are trying to apply it where it’s not applicable."
"But I tell you it’s nothing to do with it. ey deny the justice of property,
of capital, of inheritance, while I do not deny this chief stimulus." (Levin felt disgusted himself at using such expressions, but ever since he had been engrossed
by his work, he had unconsciously come more and more frequently to use words
not Russian.) "All I want is to regulate labor."
"Which means, you’ve borrowed an idea, stripped it of all that gave it its
force, and want to make believe that it’s something new," said Nikolay, angrily
tugging at his necktie.
"But my idea has nothing in common…"
"at, anyway," said Nikolay Levin, with an ironical smile, his eyes ﬂashing
malignantly, "has the charm of—what’s one to call it?—geometrical symmetry, of
clearness, of deﬁniteness. It may be a Utopia. But if once one allows the possibility
of making of all the past a tabula rasa—no property, no family—then labor would
organize itself. But you gain nothing…"

cccxix
"Why do you mix things up? I’ve never been a communist."
"But I have, and I consider it’s premature, but rational, and it has a future,
just like Christianity in its ﬁrst ages."
"All that I maintain is that the labor force ought to be investigated from the
point of view of natural science; that is to say, it ought to be studied, its qualities
ascertained…"
"But that’s uer waste of time. at force ﬁnds a certain form of activity
of itself, according to the stage of its development. ere have been slaves ﬁrst
everywhere, then metayers; and we have the half-crop system, rent, and day laborers. What are you trying to ﬁnd?"
Levin suddenly lost his temper at these words, because at the boom of
his heart he was afraid that it was true—true that he was trying to hold the balance even between communism and the familiar forms, and that this was hardly
possible.
"I am trying to ﬁnd means of working productively for myself and for the
laborers. I want to organize…" he answered hotly.
"You don’t want to organize anything; it’s simply just as you’ve been all
your life, that you want to be original to pose as not exploiting the peasants simply, but with some idea in view."
"Oh, all right, that’s what you think—and let me alone!" answered Levin,
feeling the muscles of his le cheek twitching uncontrollably.
"You’ve never had, and never have, convictions; all you want is to please
your vanity."
"Oh, very well; then let me alone!"
"And I will let you alone! and it’s high time I did, and go to the devil with
you! and I’m very sorry I ever came!"
In spite of all Levin’s eﬀorts to soothe his brother aerwards, Nikolay would
listen to nothing he said, declaring that it was beer to part, and Konstantin saw
that it simply was that life was unbearable to him.
Nikolay was just geing ready to go, when Konstantin went in to him again
and begged him, rather unnaturally, to forgive him if he had hurt his feelings in
any way.
"Ah, generosity!" said Nikolay, and he smiled. "If you want to be right, I can
give you that satisfaction. You’re in the right; but I’m going all the same."
It was only just at parting that Nikolay kissed him, and said, looking with
sudden strangeness and seriousness at his brother:
"Anyway, don’t remember evil against me, Kostya!" and his voice quivered.
ese were the only words that had been spoken sincerely between them. Levin
knew that those words meant, "You see, and you know, that I’m in a bad way, and
maybe we shall not see each other again." Levin knew this, and the tears gushed

from his eyes. He kissed his brother once more, but he could not speak, and knew
not what to say.
ree days aer his brother’s departure, Levin too set oﬀ for his foreign
tour. Happening to meet Shtcherbatsky, Kiy’s cousin, in the railway train, Levin
greatly astonished him by his depression.
"What’s the maer with you?" Shtcherbatsky asked him.
"Oh, nothing; there’s not much happiness in life."
"Not much? You come with me to Paris instead of to Mulhausen. You shall
see how to be happy."
"No, I’ve done with it all. It’s time I was dead."
"Well, that’s a good one!" said Shtcherbatsky, laughing; "why, I’m only just
geing ready to begin."
"Yes, I thought the same not long ago, but now I know I shall soon be dead."
Levin said what he had genuinely been thinking of late. He saw nothing but
death or the advance towards death in everything. But his cherished scheme only
engrossed him the more. Life had to be got through somehow till death did come.
Darkness had fallen upon everything for him; but just because of this darkness he
felt that the one guiding clue in the darkness was his work, and he clutched it and
clung to it with all his strength.

PART FOUR
Chapter 
e Karenins, husband and wife, continued living in the same house, met every
day, but were complete strangers to one another. Alexey Alexandrovitch made it
a rule to see his wife every day, so that the servants might have no grounds for
suppositions, but avoided dining at home. Vronsky was never at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s house, but Anna saw him away from home, and her husband was aware
of it.
e position was one of misery for all three; and not one of them would
have been equal to enduring this position for a single day, if it had not been for the

cccxxi
expectation that it would change, that it was merely a temporary painful ordeal
which would pass over. Alexey Alexandrovitch hoped that this passion would
pass, as everything does pass, that everyone would forget about it, and his name
would remain unsullied. Anna, on whom the position depended, and for whom
it was more miserable than for anyone, endured it because she not merely hoped,
but ﬁrmly believed, that it would all very soon be seled and come right. She
had not the least idea what would sele the position, but she ﬁrmly believed that
something would very soon turn up now. Vronsky, against his own will or wishes,
followed her lead, hoped too that something, apart from his own action, would
be sure to solve all diﬃculties.
In the middle of the winter Vronsky spent a very tiresome week. A foreign
prince, who had come on a visit to Petersburg, was put under his charge, and he
had to show him the sights worth seeing. Vronsky was of distinguished appearance; he possessed, moreover, the art of behaving with respectful dignity, and
was used to having to do with such grand personages—that was how he came to
be put in charge of the prince. But he felt his duties very irksome. e prince
was anxious to miss nothing of which he would be asked at home, had he seen
that in Russia? And on his own account he was anxious to enjoy to the utmost all
Russian forms of amusement. Vronsky was obliged to be his guide in satisfying
both these inclinations. e mornings they spent driving to look at places of interest; the evenings they passed enjoying the national entertainments. e prince
rejoiced in health exceptional even among princes. By gymnastics and careful attention to his health he had brought himself to such a point that in spite of his
excess in pleasure he looked as fresh as a big glossy green Dutch cucumber. e
prince had traveled a great deal, and considered one of the chief advantages of
modern facilities of communication was the accessibility of the pleasures of all
nations.
He had been in Spain, and there had indulged in serenades and had made
friends with a Spanish girl who played the mandolin. In Switzerland he had killed
chamois. In England he had galloped in a red coat over hedges and killed two
hundred pheasants for a bet. In Turkey he had got into a harem; in India he had
hunted on an elephant, and now in Russia he wished to taste all the specially
Russian forms of pleasure.
Vronsky, who was, as it were, chief master of the ceremonies to him, was at
great pains to arrange all the Russian amusements suggested by various persons to
the prince. ey had race horses, and Russian pancakes and bear hunts and threehorse sledges, and gypsies and drinking feasts, with the Russian accompaniment
of broken crockery. And the prince with surprising ease fell in with the Russian
spirit, smashed trays full of crockery, sat with a gypsy girl on his knee, and seemed
to be asking—what more, and does the whole Russian spirit consist in just this?

cccxxii
In reality, of all the Russian entertainments the prince liked best French
actresses and ballet dancers and white-seal champagne. Vronsky was used to
princes, but, either because he had himself changed of late, or that he was in too
close proximity to the prince, that week seemed fearfully wearisome to him. e
whole of that week he experienced a sensation such as a man might have set in
charge of a dangerous madman, afraid of the madman, and at the same time, from
being with him, fearing for his own reason. Vronsky was continually conscious
of the necessity of never for a second relaxing the tone of stern oﬃcial respectfulness, that he might not himself be insulted. e prince’s manner of treating the
very people who, to Vronsky’s surprise, were ready to descend to any depths to
provide him with Russian amusements, was contemptuous. His criticisms of Russian women, whom he wished to study, more than once made Vronsky crimson
with indignation. e chief reason why the prince was so particularly disagreeable to Vronsky was that he could not help seeing himself in him. And what he
saw in this mirror did not gratify his self-esteem. He was a very stupid and very
self-satisﬁed and very healthy and very well-washed man, and nothing else. He
was a gentleman—that was true, and Vronsky could not deny it. He was equable
and not cringing with his superiors, was free and ingratiating in his behavior
with his equals, and was contemptuously indulgent with his inferiors. Vronsky
was himself the same, and regarded it as a great merit to be so. But for this prince
he was an inferior, and his contemptuous and indulgent aitude to him revolted
him.
"Brainless beef! can I be like that?" he thought.
Be that as it might, when, on the seventh day, he parted from the prince,
who was starting for Moscow, and received his thanks, he was happy to be rid
of his uncomfortable position and the unpleasant reﬂection of himself. He said
good-bye to him at the station on their return from a bear hunt, at which they
had had a display of Russian prowess kept up all night.

Chapter 
When he got home, Vronsky found there a note from Anna. She wrote, "I am ill
and unhappy. I cannot come out, but I cannot go on longer without seeing you.
Come in this evening. Alexey Alexandrovitch goes to the council at seven and
will be there till ten." inking for an instant of the strangeness of her bidding
him come straight to her, in spite of her husband’s insisting on her not receiving
him, he decided to go.
Vronsky had that winter got his promotion, was now a colonel, had le the
regimental quarters, and was living alone. Aer having some lunch, he lay down

cccxxiii
on the sofa immediately, and in ﬁve minutes memories of the hideous scenes he
had witnessed during the last few days were confused together and joined on to
a mental image of Anna and of the peasant who had played an important part in
the bear hunt, and Vronsky fell asleep. He waked up in the dark, trembling with
horror, and made haste to light a candle. "What was it? What? What was the
dreadful thing I dreamed? Yes, yes; I think a lile dirty man with a disheveled
beard was stooping down doing something, and all of a sudden he began saying
some strange words in French. Yes, there was nothing else in the dream," he said
to himself. "But why was it so awful?" He vividly recalled the peasant again
and those incomprehensible French words the peasant had uered, and a chill of
horror ran down his spine.
"What nonsense!" thought Vronsky, and glanced at his watch.
It was half-past eight already. He rang up his servant, dressed in haste, and
went out onto the steps, completely forgeing the dream and only worried at
being late. As he drove up to the Karenins’ entrance he looked at his watch and
saw it was ten minutes to nine. A high, narrow carriage with a pair of grays was
standing at the entrance. He recognized Anna’s carriage. "She is coming to me,"
thought Vronsky, "and beer she should. I don’t like going into that house. But no
maer; I can’t hide myself," he thought, and with that manner peculiar to him from
childhood, as of a man who has nothing to be ashamed of, Vronsky got out of his
sledge and went to the door. e door opened, and the hall porter with a rug on his
arm called the carriage. Vronsky, though he did not usually notice details, noticed
at this moment the amazed expression with which the porter glanced at him. In
the very doorway Vronsky almost ran up against Alexey Alexandrovitch. e gas
jet threw its full light on the bloodless, sunken face under the black hat and on
the white cravat, brilliant against the beaver of the coat. Karenin’s ﬁxed, dull eyes
were fastened upon Vronsky’s face. Vronsky bowed, and Alexey Alexandrovitch,
chewing his lips, lied his hand to his hat and went on. Vronsky saw him without
looking round get into the carriage, pick up the rug and the opera-glass at the
window and disappear. Vronsky went into the hall. His brows were scowling,
and his eyes gleamed with a proud and angry light in them.
"What a position!" he thought. "If he would ﬁght, would stand up for his
honor, I could act, could express my feelings; but this weakness or baseness…. He
puts me in the position of playing false, which I never meant and never mean to
do."
Vronsky’s ideas had changed since the day of his conversation with Anna
in the Vrede garden. Unconsciously yielding to the weakness of Anna—who had
surrendered herself up to him uerly, and simply looked to him to decide her fate,
ready to submit to anything—he had long ceased to think that their tie might end
as he had thought then. His ambitious plans had retreated into the background

cccxxiv
again, and feeling that he had got out of that circle of activity in which everything
was deﬁnite, he had given himself entirely to his passion, and that passion was
binding him more and more closely to her.
He was still in the hall when he caught the sound of her retreating footsteps.
He knew she had been expecting him, had listened for him, and was now going
back to the drawing room.
"No," she cried, on seeing him, and at the ﬁrst sound of her voice the tears
came into her eyes. "No; if things are to go on like this, the end will come much,
much too soon."
"What is it, dear one?"
"What? I’ve been waiting in agony for an hour, two hours … No, I won’t
… I can’t quarrel with you. Of course you couldn’t come. No, I won’t." She laid
her two hands on his shoulders, and looked a long while at him with a profound,
passionate, and at the same time searching look. She was studying his face to
make up for the time she had not seen him. She was, every time she saw him,
making the picture of him in her imagination (incomparably superior, impossible
in reality) ﬁt with him as he really was.

Chapter 
"You met him?" she asked, when they had sat down at the table in the lamplight.
"You’re punished, you see, for being late."
"Yes; but how was it? Wasn’t he to be at the council?"
"He had been and come back, and was going out somewhere again. But
that’s no maer. Don’t talk about it. Where have you been? With the prince
still?"
She knew every detail of his existence. He was going to say that he had been
up all night and had dropped asleep, but looking at her thrilled and rapturous face,
he was ashamed. And he said he had had to go to report on the prince’s departure.
"But it’s over now? He is gone?"
"ank God it’s over! You wouldn’t believe how insuﬀerable it’s been for
me."
"Why so? Isn’t it the life all of you, all young men, always lead?" she said,
kniing her brows; and taking up the crochet work that was lying on the table,
she began drawing the hook out of it, without looking at Vronsky.
"I gave that life up long ago," said he, wondering at the change in her face,
and trying to divine its meaning. "And I confess," he said, with a smile, showing
his thick, white teeth, "this week I’ve been, as it were, looking at myself in a glass,
seeing that life, and I didn’t like it."

cccxxv
She held the work in her hands, but did not crochet, and looked at him with
strange, shining, and hostile eyes.
"is morning Liza came to see me—they’re not afraid to call on me, in spite
of the Countess Lidia Ivanovna," she put in—"and she told me about your Athenian
evening. How loathsome!"
"I was just going to say…"
She interrupted him. "It was that èrése you used to know?"
"I was just saying…"
"How disgusting you are, you men! How is it you can’t understand that
a woman can never forget that," she said, geing more and more angry, and so
leing him see the cause of her irritation, "especially a woman who cannot know
your life? What do I know? What have I ever known?" she said, "what you tell
me. And how do I know whether you tell me the truth?…"
"Anna, you hurt me. Don’t you trust me? Haven’t I told you that I haven’t
a thought I wouldn’t lay bare to you?"
"Yes, yes," she said, evidently trying to suppress her jealous thoughts. "But
if only you knew how wretched I am! I believe you, I believe you…. What were
you saying?"
But he could not at once recall what he had been going to say. ese ﬁts
of jealousy, which of late had been more and more frequent with her, horriﬁed
him, and however much he tried to disguise the fact, made him feel cold to her,
although he knew the cause of her jealousy was her love for him. How oen he
had told himself that her love was happiness; and now she loved him as a woman
can love when love has outweighed for her all the good things of life—and he was
much further from happiness than when he had followed her from Moscow. en
he had thought himself unhappy, but happiness was before him; now he felt that
the best happiness was already le behind. She was uerly unlike what she had
been when he ﬁrst saw her. Both morally and physically she had changed for the
worse. She had broadened out all over, and in her face at the time when she was
speaking of the actress there was an evil expression of hatred that distorted it.
He looked at her as a man looks at a faded ﬂower he has gathered, with diﬃculty
recognizing in it the beauty for which he picked and ruined it. And in spite of this
he felt that then, when his love was stronger, he could, if he had greatly wished it,
have torn that love out of his heart; but now, when as at that moment it seemed
to him he felt no love for her, he knew that what bound him to her could not be
broken.
"Well, well, what was it you were going to say about the prince? I have
driven away the ﬁend," she added. e ﬁend was the name they had given her
jealousy. "What did you begin to tell me about the prince? Why did you ﬁnd it
so tiresome?"

cccxxvi
"Oh, it was intolerable!" he said, trying to pick up the thread of his interrupted thought. "He does not improve on closer acquaintance. If you want him
deﬁned, here he is: a prime, well-fed beast such as takes medals at the cale
shows, and nothing more," he said, with a tone of vexation that interested her.
"No; how so?" she replied. "He’s seen a great deal, anyway; he’s cultured?"
"It’s an uerly diﬀerent culture—their culture. He’s cultivated, one sees,
simply to be able to despise culture, as they despise everything but animal pleasures."
"But don’t you all care for these animal pleasures?" she said, and again he
noticed a dark look in her eyes that avoided him.
"How is it you’re defending him?" he said, smiling.
"I’m not defending him, it’s nothing to me; but I imagine, if you had not
cared for those pleasures yourself, you might have got out of them. But if it aﬀords
you satisfaction to gaze at èrése in the aire of Eve…"
"Again, the devil again," Vronsky said, taking the hand she had laid on the
table and kissing it.
"Yes; but I can’t help it. You don’t know what I have suﬀered waiting for
you. I believe I’m not jealous. I’m not jealous: I believe you when you’re here;
but when you’re away somewhere leading your life, so incomprehensible to me…"
She turned away from him, pulled the hook at last out of the crochet work,
and rapidly, with the help of her foreﬁnger, began working loop aer loop of the
wool that was dazzling white in the lamplight, while the slender wrist moved
swily, nervously in the embroidered cuﬀ.
"How was it, then? Where did you meet Alexey Alexandrovitch?" Her voice
sounded in an unnatural and jarring tone.
"We ran up against each other in the doorway."
"And he bowed to you like this?"
She drew a long face, and half-closing her eyes, quickly transformed her
expression, folded her hands, and Vronsky suddenly saw in her beautiful face
the very expression with which Alexey Alexandrovitch had bowed to him. He
smiled, while she laughed gaily, with that sweet, deep laugh, which was one of
her greatest charms.
"I don’t understand him in the least," said Vronsky. "If aer your avowal to
him at your country house he had broken with you, if he had called me out—but
this I can’t understand. How can he put up with such a position? He feels it, that’s
evident."
"He?" she said sneeringly. "He’s perfectly satisﬁed."
"What are we all miserable for, when everything might be so happy?"
"Only not he. Don’t I know him, the falsity in which he’s uerly steeped?…
Could one, with any feeling, live as he is living with me? He understands nothing,

cccxxvii
and feels nothing. Could a man of any feeling live in the same house with his
unfaithful wife? Could he talk to her, call her ‘my dear’?"
And again she could not help mimicking him: "‘Anna, ma ère; Anna,
dear’!"
"He’s not a man, not a human being—he’s a doll! No one knows him; but I
know him. Oh, if I’d been in his place, I’d long ago have killed, have torn to pieces
a wife like me. I wouldn’t have said, ‘Anna, ma ère’! He’s not a man, he’s an
oﬃcial machine. He doesn’t understand that I’m your wife, that he’s outside, that
he’s superﬂuous…. Don’t let’s talk of him!…"
"You’re unfair, very unfair, dearest," said Vronsky, trying to soothe her. "But
never mind, don’t let’s talk of him. Tell me what you’ve been doing? What is the
maer? What has been wrong with you, and what did the doctor say?"
She looked at him with mocking amusement. Evidently she had hit on other
absurd and grotesque aspects in her husband and was awaiting the moment to
give expression to them.
But he went on:
"I imagine that it’s not illness, but your condition. When will it be?"
e ironical light died away in her eyes, but a diﬀerent smile, a consciousness of something, he did not know what, and of quiet melancholy, came over her
face.
"Soon, soon. You say that our position is miserable, that we must put an
end to it. If you knew how terrible it is to me, what I would give to be able to
love you freely and boldly! I should not torture myself and torture you with my
jealousy…. And it will come soon, but not as we expect."
And at the thought of how it would come, she seemed so pitiable to herself
that tears came into her eyes, and she could not go on. She laid her hand on his
sleeve, dazzling and white with its rings in the lamplight.
"It won’t come as we suppose. I didn’t mean to say this to you, but you’ve
made me. Soon, soon, all will be over, and we shall all, all be at peace, and suﬀer
no more."
"I don’t understand," he said, understanding her.
"You asked when? Soon. And I shan’t live through it. Don’t interrupt me!"
and she made haste to speak. "I know it; I know for certain. I shall die; and I’m
very glad I shall die, and release myself and you."
Tears dropped from her eyes; he bent down over her hand and began kissing
it, trying to hide his emotion, which, he knew, had no sort of grounds, though he
could not control it.
"Yes, it’s beer so," she said, tightly gripping his hand. "at’s the only way,
the only way le us."
He had recovered himself, and lied his head.

cccxxviii
"How absurd! What absurd nonsense you are talking!"
"No, it’s the truth."
"What, what’s the truth?"
"at I shall die. I have had a dream."
"A dream?" repeated Vronsky, and instantly he recalled the peasant of his
dream.
"Yes, a dream," she said. "It’s a long while since I dreamed it. I dreamed that
I ran into my bedroom, that I had to get something there, to ﬁnd out something;
you know how it is in dreams," she said, her eyes wide with horror; "and in the
bedroom, in the corner, stood something."
"Oh, what nonsense! How can you believe…"
But she would not let him interrupt her. What she was saying was too
important to her.
"And the something turned round, and I saw it was a peasant with a disheveled beard, lile, and dreadful looking. I wanted to run away, but he bent
down over a sack, and was fumbling there with his hands…"
She showed how he had moved his hands. ere was terror in her face. And
Vronsky, remembering his dream, felt the same terror ﬁlling his soul.
"He was fumbling and kept talking quickly, quickly in French, you know: Il
faut le bare, le fer, le brayer, le pétrir…. And in my horror I tried to wake up, and
woke up … but woke up in the dream. And I began asking myself what it meant.
And Korney said to me: ‘In childbirth you’ll die, ma’am, you’ll die….’ And I woke
up."
"What nonsense, what nonsense!" said Vronsky; but he felt himself that
there was no conviction in his voice.
"But don’t let’s talk of it. Ring the bell, I’ll have tea. And stay a lile now;
it’s not long I shall…"
But all at once she stopped. e expression of her face instantaneously
changed. Horror and excitement were suddenly replaced by a look of so, solemn,
blissful aention. He could not comprehend the meaning of the change. She was
listening to the stirring of the new life within her.

Chapter 
Alexey Alexandrovitch, aer meeting Vronsky on his own steps, drove, as he had
intended, to the Italian opera. He sat through two acts there, and saw everyone
he had wanted to see. On returning home, he carefully scrutinized the hat stand,
and noticing that there was not a military overcoat there, he went, as usual, to
his own room. But, contrary to his usual habit, he did not go to bed, he walked

cccxxix
up and down his study till three o’clock in the morning. e feeling of furious
anger with his wife, who would not observe the proprieties and keep to the one
stipulation he had laid on her, not to receive her lover in her own home, gave him
no peace. She had not complied with his request, and he was bound to punish
her and carry out his threat—obtain a divorce and take away his son. He knew
all the diﬃculties connected with this course, but he had said he would do it, and
now he must carry out his threat. Countess Lidia Ivanovna had hinted that this
was the best way out of his position, and of late the obtaining of divorces had
been brought to such perfection that Alexey Alexandrovitch saw a possibility of
overcoming the formal diﬃculties. Misfortunes never come singly, and the aﬀairs
of the reorganization of the native tribes, and of the irrigation of the lands of the
Zaraisky province, had brought such oﬃcial worries upon Alexey Alexandrovitch
that he had been of late in a continual condition of extreme irritability.
He did not sleep the whole night, and his fury, growing in a sort of vast,
arithmetical progression, reached its highest limits in the morning. He dressed
in haste, and as though carrying his cup full of wrath, and fearing to spill any
over, fearing to lose with his wrath the energy necessary for the interview with
his wife, he went into her room directly he heard she was up.
Anna, who had thought she knew her husband so well, was amazed at his
appearance when he went in to her. His brow was lowering, and his eyes stared
darkly before him, avoiding her eyes; his mouth was tightly and contemptuously
shut. In his walk, in his gestures, in the sound of his voice there was a determination and ﬁrmness such as his wife had never seen in him. He went into her room,
and without greeting her, walked straight up to her writing-table, and taking her
keys, opened a drawer.
"What do you want?" she cried.
"Your lover’s leers," he said.
"ey’re not here," she said, shuing the drawer; but from that action he saw
he had guessed right, and roughly pushing away her hand, he quickly snatched a
portfolio in which he knew she used to put her most important papers. She tried
to pull the portfolio away, but he pushed her back.
"Sit down! I have to speak to you," he said, puing the portfolio under his
arm, and squeezing it so tightly with his elbow that his shoulder stood up. Amazed
and intimidated, she gazed at him in silence.
"I told you that I would not allow you to receive your lover in this house."
"I had to see him to…"
She stopped, not ﬁnding a reason.
"I do not enter into the details of why a woman wants to see her lover."
"I meant, I only…" she said, ﬂushing hotly. is coarseness of his angered
her, and gave her courage. "Surely you must feel how easy it is for you to insult

cccxxx
me?" she said.
"An honest man and an honest woman may be insulted, but to tell a thief
he’s a thief is simply la constatation d’un fait."
"is cruelty is something new I did not know in you."
"You call it cruelty for a husband to give his wife liberty, giving her the
honorable protection of his name, simply on the condition of observing the proprieties: is that cruelty?"
"It’s worse than cruel—it’s base, if you want to know!" Anna cried, in a rush
of hatred, and geing up, she was going away.
"No!" he shrieked, in his shrill voice, which pitched a note higher than usual
even, and his big hands clutching her by the arm so violently that red marks were
le from the bracelet he was squeezing, he forcibly sat her down in her place.
"Base! If you care to use that word, what is base is to forsake husband and
child for a lover, while you eat your husband’s bread!"
She bowed her head. She did not say what she had said the evening before
to her lover, that he was her husband, and her husband was superﬂuous; she did
not even think that. She felt all the justice of his words, and only said soly:
"You cannot describe my position as worse than I feel it to be myself; but
what are you saying all this for?"
"What am I saying it for? what for?" he went on, as angrily. "at you
may know that since you have not carried out my wishes in regard to observing
outward decorum, I will take measures to put an end to this state of things."
"Soon, very soon, it will end, anyway," she said; and again, at the thought
of death near at hand and now desired, tears came into her eyes.
"It will end sooner than you and your lover have planned! If you must have
the satisfaction of animal passion…"
"Alexey Alexandrovitch! I won’t say it’s not generous, but it’s not like a
gentleman to strike anyone who’s down."
"Yes, you only think of yourself! But the suﬀerings of a man who was your
husband have no interest for you. You don’t care that his whole life is ruined, that
he is thuﬀ … thuﬀ…"
Alexey Alexandrovitch was speaking so quickly that he stammered, and
was uerly unable to articulate the word "suﬀering." In the end he pronounced it
"thuﬀering." She wanted to laugh, and was immediately ashamed that anything
could amuse her at such a moment. And for the ﬁrst time, for an instant, she felt
for him, put herself in his place, and was sorry for him. But what could she say or
do? Her head sank, and she sat silent. He too was silent for some time, and then
began speaking in a frigid, less shrill voice, emphasizing random words that had
no special signiﬁcance.
"I came to tell you…" he said.

cccxxxi
She glanced at him. "No, it was my fancy," she thought, recalling the expression of his face when he stumbled over the word "suﬀering." "No; can a man
with those dull eyes, with that self-satisﬁed complacency, feel anything?"
"I cannot change anything," she whispered.
"I have come to tell you that I am going tomorrow to Moscow, and shall not
return again to this house, and you will receive notice of what I decide through
the lawyer into whose hands I shall intrust the task of geing a divorce. My son
is going to my sister’s," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, with an eﬀort recalling what
he had meant to say about his son.
"You take Seryozha to hurt me," she said, looking at him from under her
brows. "You do not love him…. Leave me Seryozha!"
"Yes, I have lost even my aﬀection for my son, because he is associated with
the repulsion I feel for you. But still I shall take him. Goodbye!"
And he was going away, but now she detained him.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch, leave me Seryozha!" she whispered once more. "I
have nothing else to say. Leave Seryozha till my … I shall soon be conﬁned; leave
him!"
Alexey Alexandrovitch ﬂew into a rage, and, snatching his hand from her,
he went out of the room without a word.

Chapter 
e waiting-room of the celebrated Petersburg lawyer was full when Alexey
Alexandrovitch entered it. ree ladies—an old lady, a young lady, and a merchant’s wife—and three gentlemen—one a German banker with a ring on his ﬁnger, the second a merchant with a beard, and the third a wrathful-looking government clerk in oﬃcial uniform, with a cross on his neck—had obviously been
waiting a long while already. Two clerks were writing at tables with scratching pens. e appurtenances of the writing-tables, about which Alexey Alexandrovitch was himself very fastidious, were exceptionally good. He could not help
observing this. One of the clerks, without geing up, turned wrathfully to Alexey
Alexandrovitch, half closing his eyes. "What are you wanting?"
He replied that he had to see the lawyer on some business.
"He is engaged," the clerk responded severely, and he pointed with his pen
at the persons waiting, and went on writing.
"Can’t he spare time to see me?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"He has no time free; he is always busy. Kindly wait your turn."
"en I must trouble you to give him my card," Alexey Alexandrovitch said
with dignity, seeing the impossibility of preserving his incognito.

cccxxxii
e clerk took the card and, obviously not approving of what he read on it,
went to the door.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was in principle in favor of the publicity of legal
proceedings, though for some higher oﬃcial considerations he disliked the application of the principle in Russia, and disapproved of it, as far as he could disapprove of anything instituted by authority of the Emperor. His whole life had
been spent in administrative work, and consequently, when he did not approve
of anything, his disapproval was soened by the recognition of the inevitability
of mistakes and the possibility of reform in every department. In the new public
law courts he disliked the restrictions laid on the lawyers conducting cases. But
till then he had had nothing to do with the law courts, and so had disapproved of
their publicity simply in theory; now his disapprobation was strengthened by the
unpleasant impression made on him in the lawyer’s waiting room.
"Coming immediately," said the clerk; and two minutes later there did actually appear in the doorway the large ﬁgure of an old solicitor who had been
consulting with the lawyer himself.
e lawyer was a lile, squat, bald man, with a dark, reddish beard, lightcolored long eyebrows, and an overhanging brow. He was aired as though for
a wedding, from his cravat to his double watch-chain and varnished boots. His
face was clever and manly, but his dress was dandiﬁed and in bad taste.
"Pray walk in," said the lawyer, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch; and,
gloomily ushering Karenin in before him, he closed the door.
"Won’t you sit down?" He indicated an armchair at a writing table covered
with papers. He sat down himself, and, rubbing his lile hands with short ﬁngers
covered with white hairs, he bent his head on one side. But as soon as he was
seled in this position a moth ﬂew over the table. e lawyer, with a swiness
that could never have been expected of him, opened his hands, caught the moth,
and resumed his former aitude.
"Before beginning to speak of my business," said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
following the lawyer’s movements with wondering eyes, "I ought to observe that
the business about which I have to speak to you is to be strictly private."
e lawyer’s overhanging reddish mustaches were parted in a scarcely perceptible smile.
"I should not be a lawyer if I could not keep the secrets conﬁded to me. But
if you would like proof…"
Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at his face, and saw that the shrewd, gray
eyes were laughing, and seemed to know all about it already.
"You know my name?" Alexey Alexandrovitch resumed.
"I know you and the good"—again he caught a moth—"work you are doing,
like every Russian," said the lawyer, bowing.

cccxxxiii
Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed, plucking up his courage. But having once
made up his mind he went on in his shrill voice, without timidity—or hesitation,
accentuating here and there a word.
"I have the misfortune," Alexey Alexandrovitch began, "to have been deceived in my married life, and I desire to break oﬀ all relations with my wife by
legal means—that is, to be divorced, but to do this so that my son may not remain
with his mother."
e lawyer’s gray eyes tried not to laugh, but they were dancing with irrepressible glee, and Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that it was not simply the delight
of a man who has just got a proﬁtable job: there was triumph and joy, there was
a gleam like the malignant gleam he saw in his wife’s eyes.
"You desire my assistance in securing a divorce?"
"Yes, precisely so; but I ought to warn you that I may be wasting your time
and aention. I have come simply to consult you as a preliminary step. I want a
divorce, but the form in which it is possible is of great consequence to me. It is
very possible that if that form does not correspond with my requirements I may
give up a legal divorce."
"Oh, that’s always the case," said the lawyer, "and that’s always for you to
decide."
He let his eyes rest on Alexey Alexandrovitch’s feet, feeling that he might
oﬀend his client by the sight of his irrepressible amusement. He looked at a moth
that ﬂew before his nose, and moved his hands, but did not catch it from regard
for Alexey Alexandrovitch’s position.
"ough in their general features our laws on this subject are known to me,"
pursued Alexey Alexandrovitch, "I should be glad to have an idea of the forms in
which such things are done in practice."
"You would be glad," the lawyer, without liing his eyes, responded, adopting, with a certain satisfaction, the tone of his client’s remarks, "for me to lay
before you all the methods by which you could secure what you desire?"
And on receiving an assuring nod from Alexey Alexandrovitch, he went
on, stealing a glance now and then at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s face, which was
growing red in patches.
"Divorce by our laws," he said, with a slight shade of disapprobation of our
laws, "is possible, as you are aware, in the following cases…. Wait a lile!" he
called to a clerk who put his head in at the door, but he got up all the same, said a
few words to him, and sat down again. "… In the following cases: physical defect
in the married parties, desertion without communication for ﬁve years," he said,
crooking a short ﬁnger covered with hair, "adultery" (this word he pronounced
with obvious satisfaction), "subdivided as follows" (he continued to crook his fat
ﬁngers, though the three cases and their subdivisions could obviously not be clas-

cccxxxiv
siﬁed together): "physical defect of the husband or of the wife, adultery of the
husband or of the wife." As by now all his ﬁngers were used up, he uncrooked
all his ﬁngers and went on: "is is the theoretical view; but I imagine you have
done me the honor to apply to me in order to learn its application in practice.
And therefore, guided by precedents, I must inform you that in practice cases of
divorce may all be reduced to the following—there’s no physical defect, I may
assume, nor desertion?…"
Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed his head in assent.
"—May be reduced to the following: adultery of one of the married parties,
and the detection in the fact of the guilty party by mutual agreement, and failing such agreement, accidental detection. It must be admied that the laer case
is rarely met with in practice," said the lawyer, and stealing a glance at Alexey
Alexandrovitch he paused, as a man selling pistols, aer enlarging on the advantages of each weapon, might await his customer’s choice. But Alexey Alexandrovitch said nothing, and therefore the lawyer went on: "e most usual and
simple, the sensible course, I consider, is adultery by mutual consent. I should
not permit myself to express it so, speaking with a man of no education," he said,
"but I imagine that to you this is comprehensible."
Alexey Alexandrovitch was, however, so perturbed that he did not immediately comprehend all the good sense of adultery by mutual consent, and his eyes
expressed this uncertainty; but the lawyer promptly came to his assistance.
"People cannot go on living together—here you have a fact. And if both
are agreed about it, the details and formalities become a maer of no importance.
And at the same time this is the simplest and most certain method."
Alexey Alexandrovitch fully understood now. But he had religious scruples,
which hindered the execution of such a plan.
"at is out of the question in the present case," he said. "Only one alternative is possible: undesigned detection, supported by leers which I have."
At the mention of leers the lawyer pursed up his lips, and gave uerance
to a thin lile compassionate and contemptuous sound.
"Kindly consider," he began, "cases of that kind are, as you are aware, under
ecclesiastical jurisdiction; the reverend fathers are fond of going into the minutest
details in cases of that kind," he said with a smile, which betrayed his sympathy
with the reverend fathers’ taste. "Leers may, of course, be a partial conﬁrmation; but detection in the fact there must be of the most direct kind, that is, by
eyewitnesses. In fact, if you do me the honor to intrust your conﬁdence to me,
you will do well to leave me the choice of the measures to be employed. If one
wants the result, one must admit the means."
"If it is so…" Alexey Alexandrovitch began, suddenly turning white; but at
that moment the lawyer rose and again went to the door to speak to the intruding

cccxxxv
clerk.
"Tell her we don’t haggle over fees!" he said, and returned to Alexey Alexandrovitch.
On his way back he caught unobserved another moth. "Nice state my rep
curtains will be in by the summer!" he thought, frowning.
"And so you were saying?…" he said.
"I will communicate my decision to you by leer," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, geing up, and he clutched at the table. Aer standing a moment in
silence, he said: "From your words I may consequently conclude that a divorce
may be obtained? I would ask you to let me know what are your terms."
"It may be obtained if you give me complete liberty of action," said the
lawyer, not answering his question. "When can I reckon on receiving information
from you?" he asked, moving towards the door, his eyes and his varnished boots
shining.
"In a week’s time. Your answer as to whether you will undertake to conduct
the case, and on what terms, you will be so good as to communicate to me."
"Very good."
e lawyer bowed respectfully, let his client out of the door, and, le alone,
gave himself up to his sense of amusement. He felt so mirthful that, contrary to his
rules, he made a reduction in his terms to the haggling lady, and gave up catching
moths, ﬁnally deciding that next winter he must have the furniture covered with
velvet, like Sigonin’s.

Chapter 
Alexey Alexandrovitch had gained a brilliant victory at the siing of the Commission of the th of August, but in the sequel this victory cut the ground from under
his feet. e new commission for the inquiry into the condition of the native tribes
in all its branches had been formed and despatched to its destination with an unusual speed and energy inspired by Alexey Alexandrovitch. Within three months
a report was presented. e condition of the native tribes was investigated in its
political, administrative, economic, ethnographic, material, and religious aspects.
To all these questions there were answers admirably stated, and answers admitting no shade of doubt, since they were not a product of human thought, always
liable to error, but were all the product of oﬃcial activity. e answers were all
based on oﬃcial data furnished by governors and heads of churches, and founded
on the reports of district magistrates and ecclesiastical superintendents, founded
in their turn on the reports of parochial overseers and parish priests; and so all of
these answers were unhesitating and certain. All such questions as, for instance,

cccxxxvi
of the cause of failure of crops, of the adherence of certain tribes to their ancient
beliefs, etc.—questions which, but for the convenient intervention of the oﬃcial
machine, are not, and cannot be solved for ages—received full, unhesitating solution. And this solution was in favor of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s contention. But
Stremov, who had felt stung to the quick at the last siing, had, on the reception of the commission’s report, resorted to tactics which Alexey Alexandrovitch
had not anticipated. Stremov, carrying with him several members, went over to
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s side, and not contenting himself with warmly defending the measure proposed by Karenin, proposed other more extreme measures
in the same direction. ese measures, still further exaggerated in opposition to
what was Alexey Alexandrovitch’s fundamental idea, were passed by the commission, and then the aim of Stremov’s tactics became apparent. Carried to an
extreme, the measures seemed at once to be so absurd that the highest authorities, and public opinion, and intellectual ladies, and the newspapers, all at the
same time fell foul of them, expressing their indignation both with the measures
and their nominal father, Alexey Alexandrovitch. Stremov drew back, aﬀecting
to have blindly followed Karenin, and to be astounded and distressed at what had
been done. is meant the defeat of Alexey Alexandrovitch. But in spite of failing
health, in spite of his domestic griefs, he did not give in. ere was a split in the
commission. Some members, with Stremov at their head, justiﬁed their mistake
on the ground that they had put faith in the commission of revision, instituted
by Alexey Alexandrovitch, and maintained that the report of the commission was
rubbish, and simply so much waste paper. Alexey Alexandrovitch, with a following of those who saw the danger of so revolutionary an aitude to oﬃcial
documents, persisted in upholding the statements obtained by the revising commission. In consequence of this, in the higher spheres, and even in society, all was
chaos, and although everyone was interested, no one could tell whether the native tribes really were becoming impoverished and ruined, or whether they were
in a ﬂourishing condition. e position of Alexey Alexandrovitch, owing to this,
and partly owing to the contempt lavished on him for his wife’s inﬁdelity, became
very precarious. And in this position he took an important resolution. To the astonishment of the commission, he announced that he should ask permission to go
himself to investigate the question on the spot. And having obtained permission,
Alexey Alexandrovitch prepared to set oﬀ to these remote provinces.
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s departure made a great sensation, the more so as
just before he started he oﬃcially returned the posting-fares allowed him for
twelve horses, to drive to his destination.
"I think it very noble," Betsy said about this to the Princess Myakaya. "Why
take money for posting-horses when everyone knows that there are railways everywhere now?"

cccxxxvii
But Princess Myakaya did not agree, and the Princess Tverskaya’s opinion
annoyed her indeed.
"It’s all very well for you to talk," said she, "when you have I don’t know
how many millions; but I am very glad when my husband goes on a revising tour
in the summer. It’s very good for him and pleasant traveling about, and it’s a
seled arrangement for me to keep a carriage and coachman on the money."
On his way to the remote provinces Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped for
three days at Moscow.
e day aer his arrival he was driving back from calling on the governorgeneral. At the crossroads by Gazetoy Place, where there are always crowds of
carriages and sledges, Alexey Alexandrovitch suddenly heard his name called out
in such a loud and cheerful voice that he could not help looking round. At the corner of the pavement, in a short, stylish overcoat and a low-crowned fashionable
hat, jauntily askew, with a smile that showed a gleam of white teeth and red lips,
stood Stepan Arkadyevitch, radiant, young, and beaming. He called him vigorously and urgently, and insisted on his stopping. He had one arm on the window
of a carriage that was stopping at the corner, and out of the window were thrust
the heads of a lady in a velvet hat, and two children. Stepan Arkadyevitch was
smiling and beckoning to his brother-in-law. e lady smiled a kindly smile too,
and she too waved her hand to Alexey Alexandrovitch. It was Dolly with her
children.
Alexey Alexandrovitch did not want to see anyone in Moscow, and least of
all his wife’s brother. He raised his hat and would have driven on, but Stepan
Arkadyevitch told his coachman to stop, and ran across the snow to him.
"Well, what a shame not to have let us know! Been here long? I was at
Dussot’s yesterday and saw ‘Karenin’ on the visitors’ list, but it never entered
my head that it was you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, sticking his head in at the
window of the carriage, "or I should have looked you up. I am glad to see you!" he
said, knocking one foot against the other to shake the snow oﬀ. "What a shame
of you not to let us know!" he repeated.
"I had no time; I am very busy," Alexey Alexandrovitch responded dryly.
"Come to my wife, she does so want to see you."
Alexey Alexandrovitch unfolded the rug in which his frozen feet were
wrapped, and geing out of his carriage made his way over the snow to Darya
Alexandrovna.
"Why, Alexey Alexandrovitch, what are you cuing us like this for?" said
Dolly, smiling.
"I was very busy. Delighted to see you!" he said in a tone clearly indicating
that he was annoyed by it. "How are you?"
"Tell me, how is my darling Anna?"

cccxxxviii
Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled something and would have gone on. But
Stepan Arkadyevitch stopped him.
"I tell you what we’ll do tomorrow. Dolly, ask him to dinner. We’ll ask
Koznishev and Pestsov, so as to entertain him with our Moscow celebrities."
"Yes, please, do come," said Dolly; "we will expect you at ﬁve, or six o’clock,
if you like. How is my darling Anna? How long…"
"She is quite well," Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled, frowning. "Delighted!"
and he moved away towards his carriage.
"You will come?" Dolly called aer him.
Alexey Alexandrovitch said something which Dolly could not catch in the
noise of the moving carriages.
"I shall come round tomorrow!" Stepan Arkadyevitch shouted to him.
Alexey Alexandrovitch got into his carriage, and buried himself in it so as
neither to see nor be seen.
"eer ﬁsh!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch to his wife, and glancing at his
watch, he made a motion of his hand before his face, indicating a caress to his
wife and children, and walked jauntily along the pavement.
"Stiva! Stiva!" Dolly called, reddening.
He turned round.
"I must get coats, you know, for Grisha and Tanya. Give me the money."
"Never mind; you tell them I’ll pay the bill!" and he vanished, nodding genially to an acquaintance who drove by.

Chapter 
e next day was Sunday. Stepan Arkadyevitch went to the Grand eater to a
rehearsal of the ballet, and gave Masha Tchibisova, a prey dancing-girl whom he
had just taken under his protection, the coral necklace he had promised her the
evening before, and behind the scenes in the dim daylight of the theater, managed to kiss her prey lile face, radiant over her present. Besides the gi of
the necklace he wanted to arrange with her about meeting aer the ballet. After explaining that he could not come at the beginning of the ballet, he promised
he would come for the last act and take her to supper. From the theater Stepan
Arkadyevitch drove to Ohotny Row, selected himself the ﬁsh and asparagus for
dinner, and by twelve o’clock was at Dussot’s, where he had to see three people,
luckily all staying at the same hotel: Levin, who had recently come back from
abroad and was staying there; the new head of his department, who had just been
promoted to that position, and had come on a tour of revision to Moscow; and his
brother-in-law, Karenin, whom he must see, so as to be sure of bringing him to

cccxxxix
dinner.
Stepan Arkadyevitch liked dining, but still beer he liked to give a dinner,
small, but very choice, both as regards the food and drink and as regards the selection of guests. He particularly liked the program of that day’s dinner. ere
would be fresh perch, asparagus, and la pièce de resistance—ﬁrst-rate, but quite
plain, roast beef, and wines to suit: so much for the eating and drinking. Kiy
and Levin would be of the party, and that this might not be obtrusively evident,
there would be a girl cousin too, and young Shtcherbatsky, and la pièce de resistance among the guests—Sergey Koznishev and Alexey Alexandrovitch. Sergey
Ivanovitch was a Moscow man, and a philosopher; Alexey Alexandrovitch a Petersburger, and a practical politician. He was asking, too, the well-known eccentric enthusiast, Pestsov, a liberal, a great talker, a musician, an historian, and the
most delightfully youthful person of ﬁy, who would be a sauce or garnish for
Koznishev and Karenin. He would provoke them and set them oﬀ.
e second installment for the forest had been received from the merchant
and was not yet exhausted; Dolly had been very amiable and goodhumored of late,
and the idea of the dinner pleased Stepan Arkadyevitch from every point of view.
He was in the most light-hearted mood. ere were two circumstances a lile unpleasant, but these two circumstances were drowned in the sea of good-humored
gaiety which ﬂooded the soul of Stepan Arkadyevitch. ese two circumstances
were: ﬁrst, that on meeting Alexey Alexandrovitch the day before in the street he
had noticed that he was cold and reserved with him, and puing the expression
of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s face and the fact that he had not come to see them
or let them know of his arrival with the rumors he had heard about Anna and
Vronsky, Stepan Arkadyevitch guessed that something was wrong between the
husband and wife.
at was one disagreeable thing. e other slightly disagreeable fact was
that the new head of his department, like all new heads, had the reputation already
of a terrible person, who got up at six o’clock in the morning, worked like a horse,
and insisted on his subordinates working in the same way. Moreover, this new
head had the further reputation of being a bear in his manners, and was, according
to all reports, a man of a class in all respects the opposite of that to which his predecessor had belonged, and to which Stepan Arkadyevitch had hitherto belonged
himself. On the previous day Stepan Arkadyevitch had appeared at the oﬃce in
a uniform, and the new chief had been very aﬀable and had talked to him as to an
acquaintance. Consequently Stepan Arkadyevitch deemed it his duty to call upon
him in his non-oﬃcial dress. e thought that the new chief might not tender him
a warm reception was the other unpleasant thing. But Stepan Arkadyevitch instinctively felt that everything would come round all right. "ey’re all people, all
men, like us poor sinners; why be nasty and quarrelsome?" he thought as he went

cccxl
into the hotel.
"Good-day, Vassily," he said, walking into the corridor with his hat cocked
on one side, and addressing a footman he knew; "why, you’ve let your whiskers
grow! Levin, number seven, eh? Take me up, please. And ﬁnd out whether Count
Anitchkin" (this was the new head) "is receiving."
"Yes, sir," Vassily responded, smiling. "You’ve not been to see us for a long
while."
"I was here yesterday, but at the other entrance. Is this number seven?"
Levin was standing with a peasant from Tver in the middle of the room,
measuring a fresh bearskin, when Stepan Arkadyevitch went in.
"What! you killed him?" cried Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Well done! A shebear? How are you, Arhip!"
He shook hands with the peasant and sat down on the edge of a chair, without taking oﬀ his coat and hat.
"Come, take oﬀ your coat and stay a lile," said Levin, taking his hat.
"No, I haven’t time; I’ve only looked in for a tiny second," answered Stepan
Arkadyevitch. He threw open his coat, but aerwards did take it oﬀ, and sat on
for a whole hour, talking to Levin about hunting and the most intimate subjects.
"Come, tell me, please, what you did abroad? Where have you been?" said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, when the peasant had gone.
"Oh, I stayed in Germany, in Prussia, in France, and in England—not in the
capitals, but in the manufacturing towns, and saw a great deal that was new to
me. And I’m glad I went."
"Yes, I knew your idea of the solution of the labor question."
"Not a bit: in Russia there can be no labor question. In Russia the question is
that of the relation of the working people to the land; though the question exists
there too—but there it’s a maer of repairing what’s been ruined, while with us…"
Stepan Arkadyevitch listened aentively to Levin.
"Yes, yes!" he said, "it’s very possible you’re right. But I’m glad you’re in
good spirits, and are hunting bears, and working, and interested. Shtcherbatsky
told me another story—he met you—that you were in such a depressed state, talking of nothing but death…."
"Well, what of it? I’ve not given up thinking of death," said Levin. "It’s true
that it’s high time I was dead; and that all this is nonsense. It’s the truth I’m telling
you. I do value my idea and my work awfully; but in reality only consider this: all
this world of ours is nothing but a speck of mildew, which has grown up on a tiny
planet. And for us to suppose we can have something great—ideas, work—it’s all
dust and ashes."
"But all that’s as old as the hills, my boy!"
"It is old; but do you know, when you grasp this fully, then somehow ev-

cccxli
erything becomes of no consequence. When you understand that you will die
tomorrow, if not today, and nothing will be le, then everything is so unimportant! And I consider my idea very important, but it turns out really to be as
unimportant too, even if it were carried out, as doing for that bear. So one goes
on living, amusing oneself with hunting, with work—anything so as not to think
of death!"
Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled a subtle aﬀectionate smile as he listened to
Levin.
"Well, of course! Here you’ve come round to my point. Do you remember
you aacked me for seeking enjoyment in life? Don’t be so severe, O moralist!"
"No; all the same, what’s ﬁne in life is…" Levin hesitated—"oh, I don’t know.
All I know is that we shall soon be dead."
"Why so soon?"
"And do you know, there’s less charm in life, when one thinks of death, but
there’s more peace."
"On the contrary, the ﬁnish is always the best. But I must be going," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, geing up for the tenth time.
"Oh, no, stay a bit!" said Levin, keeping him. "Now, when shall we see each
other again? I’m going tomorrow."
"I’m a nice person! Why, that’s just what I came for! You simply must come
to dinner with us today. Your brother’s coming, and Karenin, my brother-in-law."
"You don’t mean to say he’s here?" said Levin, and he wanted to inquire
about Kiy. He had heard at the beginning of the winter that she was at Petersburg with her sister, the wife of the diplomat, and he did not know whether she
had come back or not; but he changed his mind and did not ask. "Whether she’s
coming or not, I don’t care," he said to himself.
"So you’ll come?"
"Of course."
"At ﬁve o’clock, then, and not evening dress."
And Stepan Arkadyevitch got up and went down below to the new head of
his department. Instinct had not misled Stepan Arkadyevitch. e terrible new
head turned out to be an extremely amenable person, and Stepan Arkadyevitch
lunched with him and stayed on, so that it was four o’clock before he got to Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

Chapter 
Alexey Alexandrovitch, on coming back from church service, had spent the whole
morning indoors. He had two pieces of business before him that morning; ﬁrst,

cccxlii
to receive and send on a deputation from the native tribes which was on its way
to Petersburg, and now at Moscow; secondly, to write the promised leer to
the lawyer. e deputation, though it had been summoned at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s instigation, was not without its discomforting and even dangerous aspect, and he was glad he had found it in Moscow. e members of this deputation had not the slightest conception of their duty and the part they were to play.
ey naïvely believed that it was their business to lay before the commission their
needs and the actual condition of things, and to ask assistance of the government,
and uerly failed to grasp that some of their statements and requests supported
the contention of the enemy’s side, and so spoiled the whole business. Alexey
Alexandrovitch was busily engaged with them for a long while, drew up a program for them from which they were not to depart, and on dismissing them wrote
a leer to Petersburg for the guidance of the deputation. He had his chief support
in this aﬀair in the Countess Lidia Ivanovna. She was a specialist in the maer of
deputations, and no one knew beer than she how to manage them, and put them
in the way they should go. Having completed this task, Alexey Alexandrovitch
wrote the leer to the lawyer. Without the slightest hesitation he gave him permission to act as he might judge best. In the leer he enclosed three of Vronsky’s
notes to Anna, which were in the portfolio he had taken away.
Since Alexey Alexandrovitch had le home with the intention of not returning to his family again, and since he had been at the lawyer’s and had spoken,
though only to one man, of his intention, since especially he had translated the
maer from the world of real life to the world of ink and paper, he had grown
more and more used to his own intention, and by now distinctly perceived the
feasibility of its execution.
He was sealing the envelope to the lawyer, when he heard the loud tones
of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice. Stepan Arkadyevitch was disputing with Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s servant, and insisting on being announced.
"No maer," thought Alexey Alexandrovitch, "so much the beer. I will
inform him at once of my position in regard to his sister, and explain why it is I
can’t dine with him."
"Come in!" he said aloud, collecting his papers, and puing them in the
bloing-paper.
"ere, you see, you’re talking nonsense, and he’s at home!" responded
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice, addressing the servant, who had refused to let him
in, and taking oﬀ his coat as he went, Oblonsky walked into the room. "Well, I’m
awfully glad I’ve found you! So I hope…" Stepan Arkadyevitch began cheerfully.
"I cannot come," Alexey Alexandrovitch said coldly, standing and not asking
his visitor to sit down.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had thought to pass at once into those frigid rela-

cccxliii
tions in which he ought to stand with the brother of a wife against whom he
was beginning a suit for divorce. But he had not taken into account the ocean of
kindliness brimming over in the heart of Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Stepan Arkadyevitch opened wide his clear, shining eyes.
"Why can’t you? What do you mean?" he asked in perplexity, speaking in
French. "Oh, but it’s a promise. And we’re all counting on you."
"I want to tell you that I can’t dine at your house, because the terms of
relationship which have existed between us must cease."
"How? How do you mean? What for?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a
smile.
"Because I am beginning an action for divorce against your sister, my wife.
I ought to have…"
But, before Alexey Alexandrovitch had time to ﬁnish his sentence, Stepan
Arkadyevitch was behaving not at all as he had expected. He groaned and sank
into an armchair.
"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch! What are you saying?" cried Oblonsky, and
his suﬀering was apparent in his face.
"It is so."
"Excuse me, I can’t, I can’t believe it!"
Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, feeling that his words had not had the
eﬀect he anticipated, and that it would be unavoidable for him to explain his
position, and that, whatever explanations he might make, his relations with his
brother-in-law would remain unchanged.
"Yes, I am brought to the painful necessity of seeking a divorce," he said.
"I will say one thing, Alexey Alexandrovitch. I know you for an excellent,
upright man; I know Anna—excuse me, I can’t change my opinion of her—for a
good, an excellent woman; and so, excuse me, I cannot believe it. ere is some
misunderstanding," said he.
"Oh, if it were merely a misunderstanding!…"
"Pardon, I understand," interposed Stepan Arkadyevitch. "But of course….
One thing: you must not act in haste. You must not, you must not act in haste!"
"I am not acting in haste," Alexey Alexandrovitch said coldly, "but one cannot ask advice of anyone in such a maer. I have quite made up my mind."
"is is awful!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "I would do one thing, Alexey
Alexandrovitch. I beseech you, do it!" he said. "No action has yet been taken, if
I understand rightly. Before you take advice, see my wife, talk to her. She loves
Anna like a sister, she loves you, and she’s a wonderful woman. For God’s sake,
talk to her! Do me that favor, I beseech you!"
Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and Stepan Arkadyevitch looked at him
sympathetically, without interrupting his silence.

cccxliv
"You will go to see her?"
"I don’t know. at was just why I have not been to see you. I imagine our
relations must change."
"Why so? I don’t see that. Allow me to believe that apart from our connection you have for me, at least in part, the same friendly feeling I have always
had for you … and sincere esteem," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pressing his hand.
"Even if your worst suppositions were correct, I don’t—and never would—take
on myself to judge either side, and I see no reason why our relations should be
aﬀected. But now, do this, come and see my wife."
"Well, we look at the maer diﬀerently," said Alexey Alexandrovitch coldly.
"However, we won’t discuss it."
"No; why shouldn’t you come today to dine, anyway? My wife’s expecting
you. Please, do come. And, above all, talk it over with her. She’s a wonderful
woman. For God’s sake, on my knees, I implore you!"
"If you so much wish it, I will come," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, sighing.
And, anxious to change the conversation, he inquired about what interested
them both—the new head of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s department, a man not yet old,
who had suddenly been promoted to so high a position.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had previously felt no liking for Count Anitchkin,
and had always diﬀered from him in his opinions. But now, from a feeling readily
comprehensible to oﬃcials—that hatred felt by one who has suﬀered a defeat in
the service for one who has received a promotion, he could not endure him.
"Well, have you seen him?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch with a malignant
smile.
"Of course; he was at our siing yesterday. He seems to know his work
capitally, and to be very energetic."
"Yes, but what is his energy directed to?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch. "Is
he aiming at doing anything, or simply undoing what’s been done? It’s the great
misfortune of our government—this paper administration, of which he’s a worthy
representative."
"Really, I don’t know what fault one could ﬁnd with him. His policy I don’t
know, but one thing—he’s a very nice fellow," answered Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"I’ve just been seeing him, and he’s really a capital fellow. We lunched together,
and I taught him how to make, you know that drink, wine and oranges. It’s so
cooling. And it’s a wonder he didn’t know it. He liked it awfully. No, really he’s
a capital fellow."
Stepan Arkadyevitch glanced at his watch.
"Why, good heavens, it’s four already, and I’ve still to go to Dolgovushin’s!
So please come round to dinner. You can’t imagine how you will grieve my wife
and me."

cccxlv
e way in which Alexey Alexandrovitch saw his brother-in-law out was
very diﬀerent from the manner in which he had met him.
"I’ve promised, and I’ll come," he answered wearily.
"Believe me, I appreciate it, and I hope you won’t regret it," answered Stepan
Arkadyevitch, smiling.
And, puing on his coat as he went, he paed the footman on the head,
chuckled, and went out.
"At ﬁve o’clock, and not evening dress, please," he shouted once more, turning at the door.

Chapter 
It was past ﬁve, and several guests had already arrived, before the host himself got
home. He went in together with Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev and Pestsov, who
had reached the street door at the same moment. ese were the two leading
representatives of the Moscow intellectuals, as Oblonsky had called them. Both
were men respected for their character and their intelligence. ey respected
each other, but were in complete and hopeless disagreement upon almost every
subject, not because they belonged to opposite parties, but precisely because they
were of the same party (their enemies refused to see any distinction between their
views); but, in that party, each had his own special shade of opinion. And since
no diﬀerence is less easily overcome than the diﬀerence of opinion about semiabstract questions, they never agreed in any opinion, and had long, indeed, been
accustomed to jeer without anger, each at the other’s incorrigible aberrations.
ey were just going in at the door, talking of the weather, when Stepan
Arkadyevitch overtook them. In the drawing room there were already siing
Prince Alexander Dmitrievitch Shtcherbatsky, young Shtcherbatsky, Turovtsin,
Kiy, and Karenin.
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw immediately that things were not going well in
the drawing-room without him. Darya Alexandrovna, in her best gray silk gown,
obviously worried about the children, who were to have their dinner by themselves in the nursery, and by her husband’s absence, was not equal to the task of
making the party mix without him. All were siing like so many priests’ wives on
a visit (so the old prince expressed it), obviously wondering why they were there,
and pumping up remarks simply to avoid being silent. Turovtsin—good, simple
man—felt unmistakably a ﬁsh out of water, and the smile with which his thick
lips greeted Stepan Arkadyevitch said, as plainly as words: "Well, old boy, you
have popped me down in a learned set! A drinking party now, or the Château des
Fleurs, would be more in my line!" e old prince sat in silence, his bright lile

cccxlvi
eyes watching Karenin from one side, and Stepan Arkadyevitch saw that he had
already formed a phrase to sum up that politician of whom guests were invited
to partake as though he were a sturgeon. Kiy was looking at the door, calling
up all her energies to keep her from blushing at the entrance of Konstantin Levin.
Young Shtcherbatsky, who had not been introduced to Karenin, was trying to look
as though he were not in the least conscious of it. Karenin himself had followed
the Petersburg fashion for a dinner with ladies and was wearing evening dress
and a white tie. Stepan Arkadyevitch saw by his face that he had come simply to
keep his promise, and was performing a disagreeable duty in being present at this
gathering. He was indeed the person chieﬂy responsible for the chill benumbing
all the guests before Stepan Arkadyevitch came in.
On entering the drawing room Stepan Arkadyevitch apologized, explaining
that he had been detained by that prince, who was always the scapegoat for all
his absences and unpunctualities, and in one moment he had made all the guests
acquainted with each other, and, bringing together Alexey Alexandrovitch and
Sergey Koznishev, started them on a discussion of the Russiﬁcation of Poland,
into which they immediately plunged with Pestsov. Slapping Turovtsin on the
shoulder, he whispered something comic in his ear, and set him down by his wife
and the old prince. en he told Kiy she was looking very prey that evening,
and presented Shtcherbatsky to Karenin. In a moment he had so kneaded together
the social dough that the drawing room became very lively, and there was a merry
buzz of voices. Konstantin Levin was the only person who had not arrived. But
this was so much the beer, as going into the dining room, Stepan Arkadyevitch
found to his horror that the port and sherry had been procured from Deprè, and
not from Levy, and, directing that the coachman should be sent oﬀ as speedily as
possible to Levy’s, he was going back to the drawing room.
In the dining room he was met by Konstantin Levin.
"I’m not late?"
"You can never help being late!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, taking his arm.
"Have you a lot of people? Who’s here?" asked Levin, unable to help blushing, as he knocked the snow oﬀ his cap with his glove.
"All our own set. Kiy’s here. Come along, I’ll introduce you to Karenin."
Stepan Arkadyevitch, for all his liberal views, was well aware that to meet
Karenin was sure to be felt a ﬂaering distinction, and so treated his best friends
to this honor. But at that instant Konstantin Levin was not in a condition to feel
all the gratiﬁcation of making such an acquaintance. He had not seen Kiy since
that memorable evening when he met Vronsky, not counting, that is, the moment
when he had had a glimpse of her on the highroad. He had known at the boom
of his heart that he would see her here today. But to keep his thoughts free, he
had tried to persuade himself that he did not know it. Now when he heard that

cccxlvii
she was here, he was suddenly conscious of such delight, and at the same time of
such dread, that his breath failed him and he could not uer what he wanted to
say.
"What is she like, what is she like? Like what she used to be, or like what she
was in the carriage? What if Darya Alexandrovna told the truth? Why shouldn’t
it be the truth?" he thought.
"Oh, please, introduce me to Karenin," he brought out with an eﬀort, and
with a desperately determined step he walked into the drawing room and beheld
her.
She was not the same as she used to be, nor was she as she had been in the
carriage; she was quite diﬀerent.
She was scared, shy, shame-faced, and still more charming from it. She saw
him the very instant he walked into the room. She had been expecting him. She
was delighted, and so confused at her own delight that there was a moment, the
moment when he went up to her sister and glanced again at her, when she, and
he, and Dolly, who saw it all, thought she would break down and would begin to
cry. She crimsoned, turned white, crimsoned again, and grew faint, waiting with
quivering lips for him to come to her. He went up to her, bowed, and held out his
hand without speaking. Except for the slight quiver of her lips and the moisture
in her eyes that made them brighter, her smile was almost calm as she said:
"How long it is since we’ve seen each other!" and with desperate determination she pressed his hand with her cold hand.
"You’ve not seen me, but I’ve seen you," said Levin, with a radiant smile
of happiness. "I saw you when you were driving from the railway station to Ergushovo."
"When?" she asked, wondering.
"You were driving to Ergushovo," said Levin, feeling as if he would sob with
the rapture that was ﬂooding his heart. "And how dared I associate a thought of
anything not innocent with this touching creature? And, yes, I do believe it’s true
what Darya Alexandrovna told me," he thought.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took him by the arm and led him away to Karenin.
"Let me introduce you." He mentioned their names.
"Very glad to meet you again," said Alexey Alexandrovitch coldly, shaking
hands with Levin.
"You are acquainted?" Stepan Arkadyevitch asked in surprise.
"We spent three hours together in the train," said Levin smiling, "but got
out, just as in a masquerade, quite mystiﬁed—at least I was."
"Nonsense! Come along, please," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointing in the
direction of the dining room.
e men went into the dining-room and went up to a table, laid with six

cccxlviii
sorts of spirits and as many kinds of cheese, some with lile silver spades and
some without, caviar, herrings, preserves of various kinds, and plates with slices
of French bread.
e men stood round the strong-smelling spirits and salt delicacies, and the
discussion of the Russiﬁcation of Poland between Koznishev, Karenin, and Pestsov
died down in anticipation of dinner.
Sergey Ivanovitch was unequaled in his skill in winding up the most heated
and serious argument by some unexpected pinch of Aic salt that changed the
disposition of his opponent. He did this now.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had been maintaining that the Russiﬁcation of
Poland could only be accomplished as a result of larger measures which ought
to be introduced by the Russian government.
Pestsov insisted that one country can only absorb another when it is the
more densely populated.
Koznishev admied both points, but with limitations. As they were going
out of the drawing room to conclude the argument, Koznishev said, smiling:
"So, then, for the Russiﬁcation of our foreign populations there is but one
method—to bring up as many children as one can. My brother and I are terribly
in fault, I see. You married men, especially you, Stepan Arkadyevitch, are the real
patriots: what number have you reached?" he said, smiling genially at their host
and holding out a tiny wine glass to him.
Everyone laughed, and Stepan Arkadyevitch with particular good humor.
"Oh, yes, that’s the best method!" he said, munching cheese and ﬁlling the
wine-glass with a special sort of spirit. e conversation dropped at the jest.
"is cheese is not bad. Shall I give you some?" said the master of the house.
"Why, have you been going in for gymnastics again?" he asked Levin, pinching his
muscle with his le hand. Levin smiled, bent his arm, and under Stepan Arkadyevitch’s ﬁngers the muscles swelled up like a sound cheese, hard as a knob of iron,
through the ﬁne cloth of the coat.
"What biceps! A perfect Samson!"
"I imagine great strength is needed for hunting bears," observed Alexey
Alexandrovitch, who had the mistiest notions about the chase. He cut oﬀ and
spread with cheese a wafer of bread ﬁne as a spider-web.
Levin smiled.
"Not at all. ite the contrary; a child can kill a bear," he said, with a slight
bow moving aside for the ladies, who were approaching the table.
"You have killed a bear, I’ve been told!" said Kiy, trying assiduously to
catch with her fork a perverse mushroom that would slip away, and seing the
lace quivering over her white arm. "Are there bears on your place?" she added,
turning her charming lile head to him and smiling.

cccxlix
ere was apparently nothing extraordinary in what she said, but what unuerable meaning there was for him in every sound, in every turn of her lips, her
eyes, her hand as she said it! ere was entreaty for forgiveness, and trust in him,
and tenderness—so, timid tenderness—and promise and hope and love for him,
which he could not but believe in and which choked him with happiness.
"No, we’ve been hunting in the Tver province. It was coming back from
there that I met your beaufrère in the train, or your beaufrère’s brother-in-law," he
said with a smile. "It was an amusing meeting."
And he began telling with droll good-humor how, aer not sleeping all
night, he had, wearing an old fur-lined, full-skirted coat, got into Alexey Alexandrovitch’s compartment.
"e conductor, forgeing the proverb, would have chucked me out on account of my aire; but thereupon I began expressing my feelings in elevated language, and … you, too," he said, addressing Karenin and forgeing his name, "at
ﬁrst would have ejected me on the ground of the old coat, but aerwards you took
my part, for which I am extremely grateful."
"e rights of passengers generally to choose their seats are too ill-deﬁned,"
said Alexey Alexandrovitch, rubbing the tips of his ﬁngers on his handkerchief.
"I saw you were in uncertainty about me," said Levin, smiling goodnaturedly, "but I made haste to plunge into intellectual conversation to smooth
over the defects of my aire." Sergey Ivanovitch, while he kept up a conversation
with their hostess, had one ear for his brother, and he glanced askance at him.
"What is the maer with him today? Why such a conquering hero?" he thought.
He did not know that Levin was feeling as though he had grown wings. Levin
knew she was listening to his words and that she was glad to listen to him. And
this was the only thing that interested him. Not in that room only, but in the
whole world, there existed for him only himself, with enormously increased importance and dignity in his own eyes, and she. He felt himself on a pinnacle that
made him giddy, and far away down below were all those nice excellent Karenins,
Oblonskys, and all the world.
ite without aracting notice, without glancing at them, as though there
were no other places le, Stepan Arkadyevitch put Levin and Kiy side by side.
"Oh, you may as well sit there," he said to Levin.
e dinner was as choice as the china, in which Stepan Arkadyevitch was
a connoisseur. e soupe Marie-Louise was a splendid success; the tiny pies eaten
with it melted in the mouth and were irreproachable. e two footmen and
Matvey, in white cravats, did their duty with the dishes and wines unobtrusively,
quietly, and swily. On the material side the dinner was a success; it was no less
so on the immaterial. e conversation, at times general and at times between
individuals, never paused, and towards the end the company was so lively that

cccl
the men rose from the table, without stopping speaking, and even Alexey Alexandrovitch thawed.

Chapter 
Pestsov liked thrashing an argument out to the end, and was not satisﬁed with
Sergey Ivanovitch’s words, especially as he felt the injustice of his view.
"I did not mean," he said over the soup, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch,
"mere density of population alone, but in conjunction with fundamental ideas,
and not by means of principles."
"It seems to me," Alexey Alexandrovitch said languidly, and with no haste,
"that that’s the same thing. In my opinion, inﬂuence over another people is only
possible to the people which has the higher development, which…"
"But that’s just the question," Pestsov broke in in his bass.
He was always in a hurry to speak, and seemed always to put his whole soul
into what he was saying. "In what are we to make higher development consist?
e English, the French, the Germans, which is at the highest stage of development? Which of them will nationalize the other? We see the Rhine provinces
have been turned French, but the Germans are not at a lower stage!" he shouted.
"ere is another law at work there."
"I fancy that the greater inﬂuence is always on the side of true civilization,"
said Alexey Alexandrovitch, slightly liing his eyebrows.
"But what are we to lay down as the outward signs of true civilization?" said
Pestsov.
"I imagine such signs are generally very well known," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"But are they fully known?" Sergey Ivanovitch put in with a subtle smile.
"It is the accepted view now that real culture must be purely classical; but we see
most intense disputes on each side of the question, and there is no denying that
the opposite camp has strong points in its favor."
"You are for classics, Sergey Ivanovitch. Will you take red wine?" said
Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"I am not expressing my own opinion of either form of culture," Sergey
Ivanovitch said, holding out his glass with a smile of condescension, as to a child.
"I only say that both sides have strong arguments to support them," he went on,
addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch. "My sympathies are classical from education,
but in this discussion I am personally unable to arrive at a conclusion. I see no
distinct grounds for classical studies being given a preeminence over scientiﬁc
studies."

cccli
"e natural sciences have just as great an educational value," put in Pestsov.
"Take astronomy, take botany, or zoology with its system of general principles."
"I cannot quite agree with that," responded Alexey Alexandrovitch "It seems
to me that one must admit that the very process of studying the forms of language
has a peculiarly favorable inﬂuence on intellectual development. Moreover, it
cannot be denied that the inﬂuence of the classical authors is in the highest degree
moral, while, unfortunately, with the study of the natural sciences are associated
the false and noxious doctrines which are the curse of our day."
Sergey Ivanovitch would have said something, but Pestsov interrupted him
in his rich bass. He began warmly contesting the justice of this view. Sergey
Ivanovitch waited serenely to speak, obviously with a convincing reply ready.
"But," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling subtly, and addressing Karenin, "One
must allow that to weigh all the advantages and disadvantages of classical and
scientiﬁc studies is a diﬃcult task, and the question which form of education was
to be preferred would not have been so quickly and conclusively decided if there
had not been in favor of classical education, as you expressed it just now, its
moral—disons le mot—anti-nihilist inﬂuence."
"Undoubtedly."
"If it had not been for the distinctive property of anti-nihilistic inﬂuence
on the side of classical studies, we should have considered the subject more,
have weighed the arguments on both sides," said Sergey Ivanovitch with a subtle
smile, "we should have given elbow-room to both tendencies. But now we know
that these lile pills of classical learning possess the medicinal property of antinihilism, and we boldly prescribe them to our patients…. But what if they had no
such medicinal property?" he wound up humorously.
At Sergey Ivanovitch’s lile pills, everyone laughed; Turovtsin in especial
roared loudly and jovially, glad at last to have found something to laugh at, all he
ever looked for in listening to conversation.
Stepan Arkadyevitch had not made a mistake in inviting Pestsov. With
Pestsov intellectual conversation never ﬂagged for an instant. Directly Sergey
Ivanovitch had concluded the conversation with his jest, Pestsov promptly started
a new one.
"I can’t agree even," said he, "that the government had that aim. e government obviously is guided by abstract considerations, and remains indiﬀerent
to the inﬂuence its measures may exercise. e education of women, for instance,
would naturally be regarded as likely to be harmful, but the government opens
schools and universities for women."
And the conversation at once passed to the new subject of the education of
women.
Alexey Alexandrovitch expressed the idea that the education of women is

ccclii
apt to be confounded with the emancipation of women, and that it is only so that
it can be considered dangerous.
"I consider, on the contrary, that the two questions are inseparably connected together," said Pestsov; "it is a vicious circle. Woman is deprived of rights
from lack of education, and the lack of education results from the absence of rights.
We must not forget that the subjection of women is so complete, and dates from
such ages back that we are oen unwilling to recognize the gulf that separates
them from us," said he.
"You said rights," said Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till Pestsov had ﬁnished,
"meaning the right of siing on juries, of voting, of presiding at oﬃcial meetings,
the right of entering the civil service, of siing in parliament…"
"Undoubtedly."
"But if women, as a rare exception, can occupy such positions, it seems to
me you are wrong in using the expression ‘rights.’ It would be more correct to
say duties. Every man will agree that in doing the duty of a juryman, a witness,
a telegraph clerk, we feel we are performing duties. And therefore it would be
correct to say that women are seeking duties, and quite legitimately. And one can
but sympathize with this desire to assist in the general labor of man."
"ite so," Alexey Alexandrovitch assented. "e question, I imagine, is
simply whether they are ﬁed for such duties."
"ey will most likely be perfectly ﬁed," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, "when
education has become general among them. We see this…"
"How about the proverb?" said the prince, who had a long while been intent
on the conversation, his lile comical eyes twinkling. "I can say it before my
daughter: her hair is long, because her wit is…"
"Just what they thought of the negroes before their emancipation!" said
Pestsov angrily.
"What seems strange to me is that women should seek fresh duties," said
Sergey Ivanovitch, "while we see, unhappily, that men usually try to avoid them."
"Duties are bound up with rights—power, money, honor; those are what
women are seeking," said Pestsov.
"Just as though I should seek the right to be a wet-nurse and feel injured
because women are paid for the work, while no one will take me," said the old
prince.
Turovtsin exploded in a loud roar of laughter and Sergey Ivanovitch regretted that he had not made this comparison. Even Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled.
"Yes, but a man can’t nurse a baby," said Pestsov, "while a woman…"
"No, there was an Englishman who did suckle his baby on board ship," said
the old prince, feeling this freedom in conversation permissible before his own
daughters.

cccliii
"ere are as many such Englishmen as there would be women oﬃcials,"
said Sergey Ivanovitch.
"Yes, but what is a girl to do who has no family?" put in Stepan Arkadyevitch, thinking of Masha Tchibisova, whom he had had in his mind all along, in
sympathizing with Pestsov and supporting him.
"If the story of such a girl were thoroughly sied, you would ﬁnd she had
abandoned a family—her own or a sister’s, where she might have found a woman’s
duties," Darya Alexandrovna broke in unexpectedly in a tone of exasperation,
probably suspecting what sort of girl Stepan Arkadyevitch was thinking of.
"But we take our stand on principle as the ideal," replied Pestsov in his mellow bass. "Woman desires to have rights, to be independent, educated. She is
oppressed, humiliated by the consciousness of her disabilities."
"And I’m oppressed and humiliated that they won’t engage me at the
Foundling," the old prince said again, to the huge delight of Turovtsin, who in
his mirth dropped his asparagus with the thick end in the sauce.

Chapter 
Everyone took part in the conversation except Kiy and Levin. At ﬁrst, when
they were talking of the inﬂuence that one people has on another, there rose to
Levin’s mind what he had to say on the subject. But these ideas, once of such
importance in his eyes, seemed to come into his brain as in a dream, and had now
not the slightest interest for him. It even struck him as strange that they should
be so eager to talk of what was of no use to anyone. Kiy, too, should, one would
have supposed, have been interested in what they were saying of the rights and
education of women. How oen she had mused on the subject, thinking of her
friend abroad, Varenka, of her painful state of dependence, how oen she had
wondered about herself what would become of her if she did not marry, and how
oen she had argued with her sister about it! But it did not interest her at all. She
and Levin had a conversation of their own, yet not a conversation, but some sort
of mysterious communication, which brought them every moment nearer, and
stirred in both a sense of glad terror before the unknown into which they were
entering.
At ﬁrst Levin, in answer to Kiy’s question how he could have seen her last
year in the carriage, told her how he had been coming home from the mowing
along the highroad and had met her.
"It was very, very early in the morning. You were probably only just awake.
Your mother was asleep in the corner. It was an exquisite morning. I was walking along wondering who it could be in a four-in-hand? It was a splendid set of

cccliv
four horses with bells, and in a second you ﬂashed by, and I saw you at the window—you were siing like this, holding the strings of your cap in both hands, and
thinking awfully deeply about something," he said, smiling. "How I should like to
know what you were thinking about then! Something important?"
"Wasn’t I dreadfully untidy?" she wondered, but seeing the smile of ecstasy
these reminiscences called up, she felt that the impression she had made had been
very good. She blushed and laughed with delight; "Really I don’t remember."
"How nicely Turovtsin laughs!" said Levin, admiring his moist eyes and
shaking chest.
"Have you known him long?" asked Kiy.
"Oh, everyone knows him!"
"And I see you think he’s a horrid man?"
"Not horrid, but nothing in him."
"Oh, you’re wrong! And you must give up thinking so directly!" said Kiy.
"I used to have a very poor opinion of him too, but he, he’s an awfully nice and
wonderfully good-hearted man. He has a heart of gold."
"How could you ﬁnd out what sort of heart he has?"
"We are great friends. I know him very well. Last winter, soon aer … you
came to see us," she said, with a guilty and at the same time conﬁding smile, "all
Dolly’s children had scarlet fever, and he happened to come and see her. And only
fancy," she said in a whisper, "he felt so sorry for her that he stayed and began to
help her look aer the children. Yes, and for three weeks he stopped with them,
and looked aer the children like a nurse."
"I am telling Konstantin Dmitrievitch about Turovtsin in the scarlet fever,"
she said, bending over to her sister.
"Yes, it was wonderful, noble!" said Dolly, glancing towards Turovtsin, who
had become aware they were talking of him, and smiling gently to him. Levin
glanced once more at Turovtsin, and wondered how it was he had not realized all
this man’s goodness before.
"I’m sorry, I’m sorry, and I’ll never think ill of people again!" he said gaily,
genuinely expressing what he felt at the moment.

Chapter 
Connected with the conversation that had sprung up on the rights of women
there were certain questions as to the inequality of rights in marriage improper
to discuss before the ladies. Pestsov had several times during dinner touched upon
these questions, but Sergey Ivanovitch and Stepan Arkadyevitch carefully drew
him oﬀ them.

ccclv
When they rose from the table and the ladies had gone out, Pestsov did not
follow them, but addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch, began to expound the chief
ground of inequality. e inequality in marriage, in his opinion, lay in the fact that
the inﬁdelity of the wife and the inﬁdelity of the husband are punished unequally,
both by the law and by public opinion. Stepan Arkadyevitch went hurriedly up
to Alexey Alexandrovitch and oﬀered him a cigar.
"No, I don’t smoke," Alexey Alexandrovitch answered calmly, and as though
purposely wishing to show that he was not afraid of the subject, he turned to
Pestsov with a chilly smile.
"I imagine that such a view has a foundation in the very nature of things,"
he said, and would have gone on to the drawing room. But at this point Turovtsin broke suddenly and unexpectedly into the conversation, addressing Alexey
Alexandrovitch.
"You heard, perhaps, about Pryatchnikov?" said Turovtsin, warmed up by
the champagne he had drunk, and long waiting for an opportunity to break the
silence that had weighed on him. "Vasya Pryatchnikov," he said, with a goodnatured smile on his damp, red lips, addressing himself principally to the most
important guest, Alexey Alexandrovitch, "they told me today he fought a duel
with Kvitsky at Tver, and has killed him."
Just as it always seems that one bruises oneself on a sore place, so Stepan
Arkadyevitch felt now that the conversation would by ill luck fall every moment
on Alexey Alexandrovitch’s sore spot. He would again have got his brother-inlaw away, but Alexey Alexandrovitch himself inquired, with curiosity:
"What did Pryatchnikov ﬁght about?"
"His wife. Acted like a man, he did! Called him out and shot him!"
"Ah!" said Alexey Alexandrovitch indiﬀerently, and liing his eyebrows, he
went into the drawing room.
"How glad I am you have come," Dolly said with a frightened smile, meeting
him in the outer drawing room. "I must talk to you. Let’s sit here."
Alexey Alexandrovitch, with the same expression of indiﬀerence, given him
by his lied eyebrows, sat down beside Darya Alexandrovna, and smiled aﬀectedly.
"It’s fortunate," said he, "especially as I was meaning to ask you to excuse
me, and to be taking leave. I have to start tomorrow."
Darya Alexandrovna was ﬁrmly convinced of Anna’s innocence, and she
felt herself growing pale and her lips quivering with anger at this frigid, unfeeling
man, who was so calmly intending to ruin her innocent friend.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch," she said, with desperate resolution looking him in
the face, "I asked you about Anna, you made me no answer. How is she?"
"She is, I believe, quite well, Darya Alexandrovna," replied Alexey Alexan-

ccclvi
drovitch, not looking at her.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch, forgive me, I have no right … but I love Anna as
a sister, and esteem her; I beg, I beseech you to tell me what is wrong between
you? what fault do you ﬁnd with her?"
Alexey Alexandrovitch frowned, and almost closing his eyes, dropped his
head.
"I presume that your husband has told you the grounds on which I consider
it necessary to change my aitude to Anna Arkadyevna?" he said, not looking her
in the face, but eyeing with displeasure Shtcherbatsky, who was walking across
the drawing room.
"I don’t believe it, I don’t believe it, I can’t believe it!" Dolly said, clasping
her bony hands before her with a vigorous gesture. She rose quickly, and laid her
hand on Alexey Alexandrovitch’s sleeve. "We shall be disturbed here. Come this
way, please."
Dolly’s agitation had an eﬀect on Alexey Alexandrovitch. He got up and
submissively followed her to the schoolroom. ey sat down to a table covered
with an oilcloth cut in slits by penknives.
"I don’t, I don’t believe it!" Dolly said, trying to catch his glance that avoided
her.
"One cannot disbelieve facts, Darya Alexandrovna," said he, with an emphasis on the word "facts."
"But what has she done?" said Darya Alexandrovna. "What precisely has
she done?"
"She has forsaken her duty, and deceived her husband. at’s what she has
done," said he.
"No, no, it can’t be! No, for God’s sake, you are mistaken," said Dolly, puing
her hands to her temples and closing her eyes.
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled coldly, with his lips alone, meaning to signify
to her and to himself the ﬁrmness of his conviction; but this warm defense, though
it could not shake him, reopened his wound. He began to speak with greater heat.
"It is extremely diﬃcult to be mistaken when a wife herself informs her
husband of the fact—informs him that eight years of her life, and a son, all that’s
a mistake, and that she wants to begin life again," he said angrily, with a snort.
"Anna and sin—I cannot connect them, I cannot believe it!"
"Darya Alexandrovna," he said, now looking straight into Dolly’s kindly,
troubled face, and feeling that his tongue was being loosened in spite of himself,
"I would give a great deal for doubt to be still possible. When I doubted, I was
miserable, but it was beer than now. When I doubted, I had hope; but now there
is no hope, and still I doubt of everything. I am in such doubt of everything that I
even hate my son, and sometimes do not believe he is my son. I am very unhappy."

ccclvii
He had no need to say that. Darya Alexandrovna had seen that as soon as
he glanced into her face; and she felt sorry for him, and her faith in the innocence
of her friend began to toer.
"Oh, this is awful, awful! But can it be true that you are resolved on a
divorce?"
"I am resolved on extreme measures. ere is nothing else for me to do."
"Nothing else to do, nothing else to do…" she replied, with tears in her eyes.
"Oh no, don’t say nothing else to do!" she said.
"What is horrible in a trouble of this kind is that one cannot, as in any
other—in loss, in death—bear one’s trouble in peace, but that one must act," said
he, as though guessing her thought. "One must get out of the humiliating position
in which one is placed; one can’t live à trois."
"I understand, I quite understand that," said Dolly, and her head sank. She
was silent for a lile, thinking of herself, of her own grief in her family, and all
at once, with an impulsive movement, she raised her head and clasped her hands
with an imploring gesture. "But wait a lile! You are a Christian. ink of her!
What will become of her, if you cast her o?"
"I have thought, Darya Alexandrovna, I have thought a great deal," said
Alexey Alexandrovitch. His face turned red in patches, and his dim eyes looked
straight before him. Darya Alexandrovna at that moment pitied him with all
her heart. "at was what I did indeed when she herself made known to me my
humiliation; I le everything as of old. I gave her a chance to reform, I tried to
save her. And with what result? She would not regard the slightest request—that
she should observe decorum," he said, geing heated. "One may save anyone who
does not want to be ruined; but if the whole nature is so corrupt, so depraved, that
ruin itself seems to be her salvation, what’s to be done?"
"Anything, only not divorce!" answered Darya Alexandrovna
"But what is anything?"
"No, it is awful! She will be no one’s wife, she will be lost!"
"What can I do?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, raising his shoulders and his
eyebrows. e recollection of his wife’s last act had so incensed him that he had
become frigid, as at the beginning of the conversation. "I am very grateful for
your sympathy, but I must be going," he said, geing up.
"No, wait a minute. You must not ruin her. Wait a lile; I will tell you
about myself. I was married, and my husband deceived me; in anger and jealousy, I would have thrown up everything, I would myself…. But I came to myself
again; and who did it? Anna saved me. And here I am living on. e children are
growing up, my husband has come back to his family, and feels his fault, is growing purer, beer, and I live on…. I have forgiven it, and you ought to forgive!"
Alexey Alexandrovitch heard her, but her words had no eﬀect on him now.

ccclviii
All the hatred of that day when he had resolved on a divorce had sprung up again
in his soul. He shook himself, and said in a shrill, loud voice:—
"Forgive I cannot, and do not wish to, and I regard it as wrong. I have done
everything for this woman, and she has trodden it all in the mud to which she is
akin. I am not a spiteful man, I have never hated anyone, but I hate her with my
whole soul, and I cannot even forgive her, because I hate her too much for all the
wrong she has done me!" he said, with tones of hatred in his voice.
"Love those that hate you…." Darya Alexandrovna whispered timorously.
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled contemptuously. at he knew long ago, but
it could not be applied to his case.
"Love those that hate you, but to love those one hates is impossible. Forgive
me for having troubled you. Everyone has enough to bear in his own grief!" And
regaining his self-possession, Alexey Alexandrovitch quietly took leave and went
away.

Chapter 
When they rose from table, Levin would have liked to follow Kiy into the drawing room; but he was afraid she might dislike this, as too obviously paying her
aention. He remained in the lile ring of men, taking part in the general conversation, and without looking at Kiy, he was aware of her movements, her looks,
and the place where she was in the drawing room.
He did at once, and without the smallest eﬀort, keep the promise he had
made her—always to think well of all men, and to like everyone always. e
conversation fell on the village commune, in which Pestsov saw a sort of special
principle, called by him the choral principle. Levin did not agree with Pestsov, nor
with his brother, who had a special aitude of his own, both admiing and not
admiing the signiﬁcance of the Russian commune. But he talked to them, simply
trying to reconcile and soen their diﬀerences. He was not in the least interested
in what he said himself, and even less so in what they said; all he wanted was that
they and everyone should be happy and contented. He knew now the one thing
of importance; and that one thing was at ﬁrst there, in the drawing room, and
then began moving across and came to a standstill at the door. Without turning
round he felt the eyes ﬁxed on him, and the smile, and he could not help turning
round. She was standing in the doorway with Shtcherbatsky, looking at him.
"I thought you were going towards the piano," said he, going up to her.
"at’s something I miss in the country—music."
"No; we only came to fetch you and thank you," she said, rewarding him
with a smile that was like a gi, "for coming. What do they want to argue for?

ccclix
No one ever convinces anyone, you know."
"Yes; that’s true," said Levin; "it generally happens that one argues warmly
simply because one can’t make out what one’s opponent wants to prove."
Levin had oen noticed in discussions between the most intelligent people
that aer enormous eﬀorts, and an enormous expenditure of logical subtleties and
words, the disputants ﬁnally arrived at being aware that what they had so long
been struggling to prove to one another had long ago, from the beginning of the
argument, been known to both, but that they liked diﬀerent things, and would
not deﬁne what they liked for fear of its being aacked. He had oen had the
experience of suddenly in a discussion grasping what it was his opponent liked
and at once liking it too, and immediately he found himself agreeing, and then all
arguments fell away as useless. Sometimes, too, he had experienced the opposite,
expressing at last what he liked himself, which he was devising arguments to
defend, and, chancing to express it well and genuinely, he had found his opponent
at once agreeing and ceasing to dispute his position. He tried to say this.
She knied her brow, trying to understand. But directly he began to illustrate his meaning, she understood at once.
"I know: one must ﬁnd out what he is arguing for, what is precious to him,
then one can…"
She had completely guessed and expressed his badly expressed idea. Levin
smiled joyfully; he was struck by this transition from the confused, verbose discussion with Pestsov and his brother to this laconic, clear, almost wordless communication of the most complex ideas.
Shtcherbatsky moved away from them, and Kiy, going up to a card table,
sat down, and, taking up the chalk, began drawing diverging circles over the new
green cloth.
ey began again on the subject that had been started at dinner—the liberty
and occupations of women. Levin was of the opinion of Darya Alexandrovna that
a girl who did not marry should ﬁnd a woman’s duties in a family. He supported
this view by the fact that no family can get on without women to help; that in
every family, poor or rich, there are and must be nurses, either relations or hired.
"No," said Kiy, blushing, but looking at him all the more boldly with her
truthful eyes; "a girl may be so circumstanced that she cannot live in the family
without humiliation, while she herself…"
At the hint he understood her.
"Oh, yes," he said. "Yes, yes, yes—you’re right; you’re right!"
And he saw all that Pestsov had been maintaining at dinner of the liberty of
woman, simply from geing a glimpse of the terror of an old maid’s existence and
its humiliation in Kiy’s heart; and loving her, he felt that terror and humiliation,
and at once gave up his arguments.

ccclx
A silence followed. She was still drawing with the chalk on the table. Her
eyes were shining with a so light. Under the inﬂuence of her mood he felt in all
his being a continually growing tension of happiness.
"Ah! I’ve scribbled all over the table!" she said, and, laying down the chalk,
she made a movement as though to get up.
"What! shall I be le alone—without her?" he thought with horror, and he
took the chalk. "Wait a minute," he said, siing down to the table. "I’ve long
wanted to ask you one thing."
He looked straight into her caressing, though frightened eyes.
"Please, ask it."
"Here," he said; and he wrote the initial leers, w, y, t, m, i, c, n, b, d, t, m, n, o,
t. ese leers meant, "When you told me it could never be, did that mean never,
or then?" ere seemed no likelihood that she could make out this complicated
sentence; but he looked at her as though his life depended on her understanding
the words. She glanced at him seriously, then leaned her puckered brow on her
hands and began to read. Once or twice she stole a look at him, as though asking
him, "Is it what I think?"
"I understand," she said, ﬂushing a lile.
"What is this word?" he said, pointing to the n that stood for never.
"It means never," she said; "but that’s not true!"
He quickly rubbed out what he had wrien, gave her the chalk, and stood
up. She wrote, t, i, c, n, a, d.
Dolly was completely comforted in the depression caused by her conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch when she caught sight of the two ﬁgures: Kiy
with the chalk in her hand, with a shy and happy smile looking upwards at Levin,
and his handsome ﬁgure bending over the table with glowing eyes fastened one
minute on the table and the next on her. He was suddenly radiant: he had understood. It meant, "en I could not answer diﬀerently."
He glanced at her questioningly, timidly.
"Only then?"
"Yes," her smile answered.
"And n… and now?" he asked.
"Well, read this. I’ll tell you what I should like—should like so much!" she
wrote the initial leers, i, y, c, f, a, f, w, h. is meant, "If you could forget and
forgive what happened."
He snatched the chalk with nervous, trembling ﬁngers, and breaking it,
wrote the initial leers of the following phrase, "I have nothing to forget and
to forgive; I have never ceased to love you."
She glanced at him with a smile that did not waver.
"I understand," she said in a whisper.

ccclxi
He sat down and wrote a long phrase. She understood it all, and without
asking him, "Is it this?" took the chalk and at once answered.
For a long while he could not understand what she had wrien, and oen
looked into her eyes. He was stupeﬁed with happiness. He could not supply the
word she had meant; but in her charming eyes, beaming with happiness, he saw
all he needed to know. And he wrote three leers. But he had hardly ﬁnished
writing when she read them over her arm, and herself ﬁnished and wrote the
answer, "Yes."
"You’re playing secrétaire?" said the old prince. "But we must really be getting along if you want to be in time at the theater."
Levin got up and escorted Kiy to the door.
In their conversation everything had been said; it had been said that she
loved him, and that she would tell her father and mother that he would come
tomorrow morning.

Chapter 
When Kiy had gone and Levin was le alone, he felt such uneasiness without
her, and such an impatient longing to get as quickly, as quickly as possible, to
tomorrow morning, when he would see her again and be plighted to her forever,
that he felt afraid, as though of death, of those fourteen hours that he had to get
through without her. It was essential for him to be with someone to talk to, so
as not to be le alone, to kill time. Stepan Arkadyevitch would have been the
companion most congenial to him, but he was going out, he said, to a soirée, in
reality to the ballet. Levin only had time to tell him he was happy, and that he
loved him, and would never, never forget what he had done for him. e eyes
and the smile of Stepan Arkadyevitch showed Levin that he comprehended that
feeling ﬁingly.
"Oh, so it’s not time to die yet?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pressing Levin’s
hand with emotion.
"N-n-no!" said Levin.
Darya Alexandrovna too, as she said good-bye to him, gave him a sort of
congratulation, saying, "How glad I am you have met Kiy again! One must value
old friends." Levin did not like these words of Darya Alexandrovna’s. She could
not understand how loy and beyond her it all was, and she ought not to have
dared to allude to it. Levin said good-bye to them, but, not to be le alone, he
aached himself to his brother.
"Where are you going?"
"I’m going to a meeting."

ccclxii
"Well, I’ll come with you. May I?"
"What for? Yes, come along," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling. "What is the
maer with you today?"
"With me? Happiness is the maer with me!" said Levin, leing down the
window of the carriage they were driving in. "You don’t mind?—it’s so stiﬂing.
It’s happiness is the maer with me! Why is it you have never married?"
Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.
"I am very glad, she seems a nice gi…" Sergey Ivanovitch was beginning.
"Don’t say it! don’t say it!" shouted Levin, clutching at the collar of his fur
coat with both hands, and muﬄing him up in it. "She’s a nice girl" were such
simple, humble words, so out of harmony with his feeling.
Sergey Ivanovitch laughed outright a merry laugh, which was rare with
him. "Well, anyway, I may say that I’m very glad of it."
"at you may do tomorrow, tomorrow and nothing more! Nothing, nothing, silence," said Levin, and muﬄing him once more in his fur coat, he added: "I
do like you so! Well, is it possible for me to be present at the meeting?"
"Of course it is."
"What is your discussion about today?" asked Levin, never ceasing smiling.
ey arrived at the meeting. Levin heard the secretary hesitatingly read the
minutes which he obviously did not himself understand; but Levin saw from this
secretary’s face what a good, nice, kind-hearted person he was. is was evident
from his confusion and embarrassment in reading the minutes. en the discussion began. ey were disputing about the misappropriation of certain sums
and the laying of certain pipes, and Sergey Ivanovitch was very cuing to two
members, and said something at great length with an air of triumph; and another
member, scribbling something on a bit of paper, began timidly at ﬁrst, but afterwards answered him very viciously and delightfully. And then Sviazhsky (he
was there too) said something too, very handsomely and nobly. Levin listened to
them, and saw clearly that these missing sums and these pipes were not anything
real, and that they were not at all angry, but were all the nicest, kindest people,
and everything was as happy and charming as possible among them. ey did no
harm to anyone, and were all enjoying it. What struck Levin was that he could see
through them all today, and from lile, almost imperceptible signs knew the soul
of each, and saw distinctly that they were all good at heart. And Levin himself
in particular they were all extremely fond of that day. at was evident from the
way they spoke to him, from the friendly, aﬀectionate way even those he did not
know looked at him.
"Well, did you like it?" Sergey Ivanovitch asked him.
"Very much. I never supposed it was so interesting! Capital! Splendid!"
Sviazhsky went up to Levin and invited him to come round to tea with him.

ccclxiii
Levin was uerly at a loss to comprehend or recall what it was he had disliked
in Sviazhsky, what he had failed to ﬁnd in him. He was a clever and wonderfully
good-hearted man.
"Most delighted," he said, and asked aer his wife and sister-in-law. And
from a queer association of ideas, because in his imagination the idea of Sviazhsky’s sister-in-law was connected with marriage, it occurred to him that there
was no one to whom he could more suitably speak of his happiness, and he was
very glad to go and see them.
Sviazhsky questioned him about his improvements on his estate, presupposing, as he always did, that there was no possibility of doing anything not done
already in Europe, and now this did not in the least annoy Levin. On the contrary,
he felt that Sviazhsky was right, that the whole business was of lile value, and
he saw the wonderful soness and consideration with which Sviazhsky avoided
fully expressing his correct view. e ladies of the Sviazhsky household were
particularly delightful. It seemed to Levin that they knew all about it already
and sympathized with him, saying nothing merely from delicacy. He stayed with
them one hour, two, three, talking of all sorts of subjects but the one thing that
ﬁlled his heart, and did not observe that he was boring them dreadfully, and that
it was long past their bedtime.
Sviazhsky went with him into the hall, yawning and wondering at the
strange humor his friend was in. It was past one o’clock. Levin went back to
his hotel, and was dismayed at the thought that all alone now with his impatience he had ten hours still le to get through. e servant, whose turn it was to
be up all night, lighted his candles, and would have gone away, but Levin stopped
him. is servant, Yegor, whom Levin had noticed before, struck him as a very
intelligent, excellent, and, above all, good-hearted man.
"Well, Yegor, it’s hard work not sleeping, isn’t it?"
"One’s got to put up with it! It’s part of our work, you see. In a gentleman’s
house it’s easier; but then here one makes more."
It appeared that Yegor had a family, three boys and a daughter, a sempstress,
whom he wanted to marry to a cashier in a saddler’s shop.
Levin, on hearing this, informed Yegor that, in his opinion, in marriage the
great thing was love, and that with love one would always be happy, for happiness rests only on oneself. Yegor listened aentively, and obviously quite took in
Levin’s idea, but by way of assent to it he enunciated, greatly to Levin’s surprise,
the observation that when he had lived with good masters he had always been satisﬁed with his masters, and now was perfectly satisﬁed with his employer, though
he was a Frenchman.
"Wonderfully good-hearted fellow!" thought Levin.
"Well, but you yourself, Yegor, when you got married, did you love your

ccclxiv
wife?"
"Ay! and why not?" responded Yegor.
And Levin saw that Yegor too was in an excited state and intending to express all his most heartfelt emotions.
"My life, too, has been a wonderful one. From a child up…" he was beginning
with ﬂashing eyes, apparently catching Levin’s enthusiasm, just as people catch
yawning.
But at that moment a ring was heard. Yegor departed, and Levin was le
alone. He had eaten scarcely anything at dinner, had refused tea and supper at
Sviazhsky’s, but he was incapable of thinking of supper. He had not slept the previous night, but was incapable of thinking of sleep either. His room was cold, but
he was oppressed by heat. He opened both the movable panes in his window and
sat down to the table opposite the open panes. Over the snow-covered roofs could
be seen a decorated cross with chains, and above it the rising triangle of Charles’s
Wain with the yellowish light of Capella. He gazed at the cross, then at the stars,
drank in the fresh freezing air that ﬂowed evenly into the room, and followed
as though in a dream the images and memories that rose in his imagination. At
four o’clock he heard steps in the passage and peeped out at the door. It was the
gambler Myaskin, whom he knew, coming from the club. He walked gloomily,
frowning and coughing. "Poor, unlucky fellow!" thought Levin, and tears came
into his eyes from love and pity for this man. He would have talked with him,
and tried to comfort him, but remembering that he had nothing but his shirt on,
he changed his mind and sat down again at the open pane to bathe in the cold
air and gaze at the exquisite lines of the cross, silent, but full of meaning for him,
and the mounting lurid yellow star. At seven o’clock there was a noise of people
polishing the ﬂoors, and bells ringing in some servants’ department, and Levin
felt that he was beginning to get frozen. He closed the pane, washed, dressed,
and went out into the street.

Chapter 
e streets were still empty. Levin went to the house of the Shtcherbatskys. e
visitors’ doors were closed and everything was asleep. He walked back, went
into his room again, and asked for coﬀee. e day servant, not Yegor this time,
brought it to him. Levin would have entered into conversation with him, but a
bell rang for the servant, and he went out. Levin tried to drink coﬀee and put
some roll in his mouth, but his mouth was quite at a loss what to do with the roll.
Levin, rejecting the roll, put on his coat and went out again for a walk. It was
nine o’clock when he reached the Shtcherbatskys’ steps the second time. In the

ccclxv
house they were only just up, and the cook came out to go marketing. He had to
get through at least two hours more.
All that night and morning Levin lived perfectly unconsciously, and felt
perfectly lied out of the conditions of material life. He had eaten nothing for a
whole day, he had not slept for two nights, had spent several hours undressed in
the frozen air, and felt not simply fresher and stronger than ever, but felt uerly
independent of his body; he moved without muscular eﬀort, and felt as if he could
do anything. He was convinced he could ﬂy upwards or li the corner of the
house, if need be. He spent the remainder of the time in the street, incessantly
looking at his watch and gazing about him.
And what he saw then, he never saw again aer. e children especially
going to school, the bluish doves ﬂying down from the roofs to the pavement,
and the lile loaves covered with ﬂour, thrust out by an unseen hand, touched
him. ose loaves, those doves, and those two boys were not earthly creatures. It
all happened at the same time: a boy ran towards a dove and glanced smiling at
Levin; the dove, with a whir of her wings, darted away, ﬂashing in the sun, amid
grains of snow that quivered in the air, while from a lile window there came
a smell of fresh-baked bread, and the loaves were put out. All of this together
was so extraordinarily nice that Levin laughed and cried with delight. Going a
long way round by Gazetny Place and Kislovka, he went back again to the hotel,
and puing his watch before him, he sat down to wait for twelve o’clock. In the
next room they were talking about some sort of machines, and swindling, and
coughing their morning coughs. ey did not realize that the hand was near
twelve. e hand reached it. Levin went out onto the steps. e sledge-drivers
clearly knew all about it. ey crowded round Levin with happy faces, quarreling
among themselves, and oﬀering their services. Trying not to oﬀend the other
sledge drivers, and promising to drive with them too, Levin took one and told
him to drive to the Shtcherbatskys’. e sledge-driver was splendid in a white
shirt-collar sticking out over his overcoat and into his strong, full-blooded red
neck. e sledge was high and comfortable, and altogether such a one as Levin
never drove in aer, and the horse was a good one, and tried to gallop but didn’t
seem to move. e driver knew the Shtcherbatskys’ house, and drew up at the
entrance with a curve of his arm and a "Wo!" especially indicative of respect for
his fare. e Shtcherbatskys’ hall-porter certainly knew all about it. is was
evident from the smile in his eyes and the way he said:
"Well, it’s a long while since you’ve been to see us, Konstantin
Demitrievitch!"
Not only he knew all about it, but he was unmistakably delighted and making eﬀorts to conceal his joy. Looking into his kindly old eyes, Levin realized even
something new in his happiness.

ccclxvi
"Are they up?"
"Pray walk in! Leave it here," said he, smiling, as Levin would have come
back to take his hat. at meant something.
"To whom shall I announce your honor?" asked the footman.
e footman, though a young man, and one of the new school of footmen,
a dandy, was a very kind-hearted, good fellow, and he too knew all about it.
"e princess … the prince … the young princess…" said Levin.
e ﬁrst person he saw was Mademoiselle Linon. She walked across the
room, and her ringlets and her face were beaming. He had only just spoken to her,
when suddenly he heard the rustle of a skirt at the door, and Mademoiselle Linon
vanished from Levin’s eyes, and a joyful terror came over him at the nearness of
his happiness. Mademoiselle Linon was in great haste, and leaving him, went out
at the other door. Directly she had gone out, swi, swi light steps sounded on
the parquet, and his bliss, his life, himself—what was best in himself, what he had
so long sought and longed for—was quickly, so quickly approaching him. She did
not walk, but seemed, by some unseen force, to ﬂoat to him. He saw nothing but
her clear, truthful eyes, frightened by the same bliss of love that ﬂooded his heart.
ose eyes were shining nearer and nearer, blinding him with their light of love.
She stopped still close to him, touching him. Her hands rose and dropped onto
his shoulders.
She had done all she could—she had run up to him and given herself up
entirely, shy and happy. He put his arms round her and pressed his lips to her
mouth that sought his kiss.
She too had not slept all night, and had been expecting him all the morning.
Her mother and father had consented without demur, and were happy in
her happiness. She had been waiting for him. She wanted to be the ﬁrst to tell
him her happiness and his. She had got ready to see him alone, and had been
delighted at the idea, and had been shy and ashamed, and did not know herself
what she was doing. She had heard his steps and voice, and had waited at the
door for Mademoiselle Linon to go. Mademoiselle Linon had gone away. Without
thinking, without asking herself how and what, she had gone up to him, and did
as she was doing.
"Let us go to mamma!" she said, taking him by the hand. For a long while he
could say nothing, not so much because he was afraid of desecrating the loiness
of his emotion by a word, as that every time he tried to say something, instead
of words he felt that tears of happiness were welling up. He took her hand and
kissed it.
"Can it be true?" he said at last in a choked voice. "I can’t believe you love
me, dear!"
She smiled at that "dear," and at the timidity with which he glanced at her.

ccclxvii
"Yes!" she said signiﬁcantly, deliberately. "I am so happy!"
Not leing go his hands, she went into the drawing room. e princess,
seeing them, breathed quickly, and immediately began to cry and then immediately began to laugh, and with a vigorous step Levin had not expected, ran up to
him, and hugging his head, kissed him, weing his cheeks with her tears.
"So it is all seled! I am glad. Love her. I am glad…. Kiy!"
"You’ve not been long seling things," said the old prince, trying to seem
unmoved; but Levin noticed that his eyes were wet when he turned to him.
"I’ve long, always wished for this!" said the prince, taking Levin by the arm
and drawing him towards himself. "Even when this lile feather-head fancied…"
"Papa!" shrieked Kiy, and shut his mouth with her hands.
"Well, I won’t!" he said. "I’m very, very … plea… Oh, what a fool I am…"
He embraced Kiy, kissed her face, her hand, her face again, and made the
sign of the cross over her.
And there came over Levin a new feeling of love for this man, till then
so lile known to him, when he saw how slowly and tenderly Kiy kissed his
muscular hand.

Chapter 
e princess sat in her armchair, silent and smiling; the prince sat down beside
her. Kiy stood by her father’s chair, still holding his hand. All were silent.
e princess was the ﬁrst to put everything into words, and to translate all
thoughts and feelings into practical questions. And all equally felt this strange
and painful for the ﬁrst minute.
"When is it to be? We must have the benediction and announcement. And
when’s the wedding to be? What do you think, Alexander?"
"Here he is," said the old prince, pointing to Levin—"he’s the principal person
in the maer."
"When?" said Levin blushing. "Tomorrow; If you ask me, I should say, the
benediction today and the wedding tomorrow."
"Come, mon er, that’s nonsense!"
"Well, in a week."
"He’s quite mad."
"No, why so?"
"Well, upon my word!" said the mother, smiling, delighted at this haste.
"How about the trousseau?"
"Will there really be a trousseau and all that?" Levin thought with horror.
"But can the trousseau and the benediction and all that—can it spoil my happiness?

ccclxviii
Nothing can spoil it!" He glanced at Kiy, and noticed that she was not in the least,
not in the very least, disturbed by the idea of the trousseau. "en it must be all
right," he thought.
"Oh, I know nothing about it; I only said what I should like," he said apologetically.
"We’ll talk it over, then. e benediction and announcement can take place
now. at’s very well."
e princess went up to her husband, kissed him, and would have gone
away, but he kept her, embraced her, and, tenderly as a young lover, kissed her
several times, smiling. e old people were obviously muddled for a moment, and
did not quite know whether it was they who were in love again or their daughter.
When the prince and the princess had gone, Levin went up to his betrothed and
took her hand. He was self-possessed now and could speak, and he had a great
deal he wanted to tell her. But he said not at all what he had to say.
"How I knew it would be so! I never hoped for it; and yet in my heart I was
always sure," he said. "I believe that it was ordained."
"And I!" she said. "Even when…." She stopped and went on again, looking at
him resolutely with her truthful eyes, "Even when I thrust from me my happiness.
I always loved you alone, but I was carried away. I ought to tell you…. Can you
forgive that?"
"Perhaps it was for the best. You will have to forgive me so much. I ought
to tell you…"
is was one of the things he had meant to speak about. He had resolved
from the ﬁrst to tell her two things—that he was not chaste as she was, and that
he was not a believer. It was agonizing, but he considered he ought to tell her
both these facts.
"No, not now, later!" he said.
"Very well, later, but you must certainly tell me. I’m not afraid of anything.
I want to know everything. Now it is seled."
He added: "Seled that you’ll take me whatever I may be—you won’t give
me up? Yes?"
"Yes, yes."
eir conversation was interrupted by Mademoiselle Linon, who with an
aﬀected but tender smile came to congratulate her favorite pupil. Before she had
gone, the servants came in with their congratulations. en relations arrived, and
there began that state of blissful absurdity from which Levin did not emerge till
the day aer his wedding. Levin was in a continual state of awkwardness and
discomfort, but the intensity of his happiness went on all the while increasing.
He felt continually that a great deal was being expected of him—what, he did
not know; and he did everything he was told, and it all gave him happiness. He

ccclxix
had thought his engagement would have nothing about it like others, that the
ordinary conditions of engaged couples would spoil his special happiness; but
it ended in his doing exactly as other people did, and his happiness being only
increased thereby and becoming more and more special, more and more unlike
anything that had ever happened.
"Now we shall have sweetmeats to eat," said Mademoiselle Linon—and Levin
drove oﬀ to buy sweetmeats.
"Well, I’m very glad," said Sviazhsky. "I advise you to get the bouquets from
Fomin’s."
"Oh, are they wanted?" And he drove to Fomin’s.
His brother oﬀered to lend him money, as he would have so many expenses,
presents to give….
"Oh, are presents wanted?" And he galloped to Foulde’s.
And at the confectioner’s, and at Fomin’s, and at Foulde’s he saw that he
was expected; that they were pleased to see him, and prided themselves on his
happiness, just as every one whom he had to do with during those days. What
was extraordinary was that everyone not only liked him, but even people previously unsympathetic, cold, and callous, were enthusiastic over him, gave way to
him in everything, treated his feeling with tenderness and delicacy, and shared
his conviction that he was the happiest man in the world because his betrothed
was beyond perfection. Kiy too felt the same thing. When Countess Nordston
ventured to hint that she had hoped for something beer, Kiy was so angry
and proved so conclusively that nothing in the world could be beer than Levin,
that Countess Nordston had to admit it, and in Kiy’s presence never met Levin
without a smile of ecstatic admiration.
e confession he had promised was the one painful incident of this time.
He consulted the old prince, and with his sanction gave Kiy his diary, in which
there was wrien the confession that tortured him. He had wrien this diary at
the time with a view to his future wife. Two things caused him anguish: his lack of
purity and his lack of faith. His confession of unbelief passed unnoticed. She was
religious, had never doubted the truths of religion, but his external unbelief did
not aﬀect her in the least. rough love she knew all his soul, and in his soul she
saw what she wanted, and that such a state of soul should be called unbelieving
was to her a maer of no account. e other confession set her weeping bierly.
Levin, not without an inner struggle, handed her his diary. He knew that
between him and her there could not be, and should not be, secrets, and so he had
decided that so it must be. But he had not realized what an eﬀect it would have
on her, he had not put himself in her place. It was only when the same evening
he came to their house before the theater, went into her room and saw her tearstained, pitiful, sweet face, miserable with suﬀering he had caused and nothing

ccclxx
could undo, he felt the abyss that separated his shameful past from her dovelike
purity, and was appalled at what he had done.
"Take them, take these dreadful books!" she said, pushing away the notebooks lying before her on the table. "Why did you give them me? No, it was
beer anyway," she added, touched by his despairing face. "But it’s awful, awful!"
His head sank, and he was silent. He could say nothing.
"You can’t forgive me," he whispered.
"Yes, I forgive you; but it’s terrible!"
But his happiness was so immense that this confession did not shaer it, it
only added another shade to it. She forgave him; but from that time more than
ever he considered himself unworthy of her, morally bowed down lower than ever
before her, and prized more highly than ever his undeserved happiness.

Chapter 
Unconsciously going over in his memory the conversations that had taken place
during and aer dinner, Alexey Alexandrovitch returned to his solitary room.
Darya Alexandrovna’s words about forgiveness had aroused in him nothing but
annoyance. e applicability or non-applicability of the Christian precept to his
own case was too diﬃcult a question to be discussed lightly, and this question had
long ago been answered by Alexey Alexandrovitch in the negative. Of all that had
been said, what stuck most in his memory was the phrase of stupid, good-natured
Turovtsin—"Acted like a man, he did! Called him out and shot him!" Everyone had
apparently shared this feeling, though from politeness they had not expressed it.
"But the maer is seled, it’s useless thinking about it," Alexey Alexandrovitch told himself. And thinking of nothing but the journey before him, and
the revision work he had to do, he went into his room and asked the porter who
escorted him where his man was. e porter said that the man had only just gone
out. Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered tea to be sent him, sat down to the table, and
taking the guidebook, began considering the route of his journey.
"Two telegrams," said his manservant, coming into the room. "I beg your
pardon, your excellency; I’d only just that minute gone out."
Alexey Alexandrovitch took the telegrams and opened them. e ﬁrst telegram was the announcement of Stremov’s appointment to the very post Karenin
had coveted. Alexey Alexandrovitch ﬂung the telegram down, and ﬂushing a little, got up and began to pace up and down the room. "os vult perdere dementat,"
he said, meaning by quos the persons responsible for this appointment. He was
not so much annoyed that he had not received the post, that he had been conspicuously passed over; but it was incomprehensible, amazing to him that they did

ccclxxi
not see that the wordy phrase-monger Stremov was the last man ﬁt for it. How
could they fail to see how they were ruining themselves, lowering their prestige
by this appointment?
"Something else in the same line," he said to himself bierly, opening the
second telegram. e telegram was from his wife. Her name, wrien in blue pencil, "Anna," was the ﬁrst thing that caught his eye. "I am dying; I beg, I implore
you to come. I shall die easier with your forgiveness," he read. He smiled contemptuously, and ﬂung down the telegram. at this was a trick and a fraud, of
that, he thought for the ﬁrst minute, there could be no doubt.
"ere is no deceit she would stick at. She was near her conﬁnement. Perhaps it is the conﬁnement. But what can be their aim? To legitimize the child, to
compromise me, and prevent a divorce," he thought. "But something was said in
it: I am dying…." He read the telegram again, and suddenly the plain meaning of
what was said in it struck him.
"And if it is true?" he said to himself. "If it is true that in the moment of
agony and nearness to death she is genuinely penitent, and I, taking it for a trick,
refuse to go? at would not only be cruel, and everyone would blame me, but it
would be stupid on my part."
"Piotr, call a coach; I am going to Petersburg," he said to his servant.
Alexey Alexandrovitch decided that he would go to Petersburg and see his
wife. If her illness was a trick, he would say nothing and go away again. If she
was really in danger, and wished to see him before her death, he would forgive
her if he found her alive, and pay her the last duties if he came too late.
All the way he thought no more of what he ought to do.
With a sense of weariness and uncleanness from the night spent in the train,
in the early fog of Petersburg Alexey Alexandrovitch drove through the deserted
Nevsky and stared straight before him, not thinking of what was awaiting him.
He could not think about it, because in picturing what would happen, he could not
drive away the reﬂection that her death would at once remove all the diﬃculty of
his position. Bakers, closed shops, night-cabmen, porters sweeping the pavements
ﬂashed past his eyes, and he watched it all, trying to smother the thought of what
was awaiting him, and what he dared not hope for, and yet was hoping for. He
drove up to the steps. A sledge and a carriage with the coachman asleep stood at
the entrance. As he went into the entry, Alexey Alexandrovitch, as it were, got out
his resolution from the remotest corner of his brain, and mastered it thoroughly.
Its meaning ran: "If it’s a trick, then calm contempt and departure. If truth, do
what is proper."
e porter opened the door before Alexey Alexandrovitch rang. e porter,
Kapitonitch, looked queer in an old coat, without a tie, and in slippers.
"How is your mistress?"

ccclxxii
"A successful conﬁnement yesterday."
Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped short and turned white. He felt distinctly
now how intensely he had longed for her death.
"And how is she?"
Korney in his morning apron ran downstairs.
"Very ill," he answered. "ere was a consultation yesterday, and the doctor’s here now."
"Take my things," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, and feeling some relief at the
news that there was still hope of her death, he went into the hall.
On the hatstand there was a military overcoat. Alexey Alexandrovitch noticed it and asked:
"Who is here?"
"e doctor, the midwife, and Count Vronsky."
Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the inner rooms.
In the drawing room there was no one; at the sound of his steps there came
out of her boudoir the midwife in a cap with lilac ribbons.
She went up to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and with the familiarity given by
the approach of death took him by the arm and drew him towards the bedroom.
"ank God you’ve come! She keeps on about you and nothing but you,"
she said.
"Make haste with the ice!" the doctor’s peremptory voice said from the bedroom.
Alexey Alexandrovitch went into her boudoir.
At the table, siing sideways in a low chair, was Vronsky, his face hidden
in his hands, weeping. He jumped up at the doctor’s voice, took his hands from
his face, and saw Alexey Alexandrovitch. Seeing the husband, he was so overwhelmed that he sat down again, drawing his head down to his shoulders, as if
he wanted to disappear; but he made an eﬀort over himself, got up and said:
"She is dying. e doctors say there is no hope. I am entirely in your power,
only let me be here … though I am at your disposal. I…"
Alexey Alexandrovitch, seeing Vronsky’s tears, felt a rush of that nervous
emotion always produced in him by the sight of other people’s suﬀering, and
turning away his face, he moved hurriedly to the door, without hearing the rest
of his words. From the bedroom came the sound of Anna’s voice saying something. Her voice was lively, eager, with exceedingly distinct intonations. Alexey
Alexandrovitch went into the bedroom, and went up to the bed. She was lying
turned with her face towards him. Her cheeks were ﬂushed crimson, her eyes glittered, her lile white hands thrust out from the sleeves of her dressing gown were
playing with the quilt, twisting it about. It seemed as though she were not only
well and blooming, but in the happiest frame of mind. She was talking rapidly,

ccclxxiii
musically, and with exceptionally correct articulation and expressive intonation.
"For Alexey—I am speaking of Alexey Alexandrovitch (what a strange and
awful thing that both are Alexey, isn’t it?)—Alexey would not refuse me. I should
forget, he would forgive…. But why doesn’t he come? He’s so good he doesn’t
know himself how good he is. Ah, my God, what agony! Give me some water,
quick! Oh, that will be bad for her, my lile girl! Oh, very well then, give her to a
nurse. Yes, I agree, it’s beer in fact. He’ll be coming; it will hurt him to see her.
Give her to the nurse."
"Anna Arkadyevna, he has come. Here he is!" said the midwife, trying to
aract her aention to Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"Oh, what nonsense!" Anna went on, not seeing her husband. "No, give her
to me; give me my lile one! He has not come yet. You say he won’t forgive
me, because you don’t know him. No one knows him. I’m the only one, and it
was hard for me even. His eyes I ought to know—Seryozha has just the same
eyes—and I can’t bear to see them because of it. Has Seryozha had his dinner? I
know everyone will forget him. He would not forget. Seryozha must be moved
into the corner room, and Mariee must be asked to sleep with him."
All of a sudden she shrank back, was silent; and in terror, as though expecting a blow, as though to defend herself, she raised her hands to her face. She had
seen her husband.
"No, no!" she began. "I am not afraid of him; I am afraid of death. Alexey,
come here. I am in a hurry, because I’ve no time, I’ve not long le to live; the
fever will begin directly and I shall understand nothing more. Now I understand,
I understand it all, I see it all!"
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s wrinkled face wore an expression of agony; he
took her by the hand and tried to say something, but he could not uer it; his
lower lip quivered, but he still went on struggling with his emotion, and only
now and then glanced at her. And each time he glanced at her, he saw her eyes
gazing at him with such passionate and triumphant tenderness as he had never
seen in them.
"Wait a minute, you don’t know … stay a lile, stay!…" She stopped, as
though collecting her ideas. "Yes," she began; "yes, yes, yes. is is what I wanted
to say. Don’t be surprised at me. I’m still the same…. But there is another woman
in me, I’m afraid of her: she loved that man, and I tried to hate you, and could not
forget about her that used to be. I’m not that woman. Now I’m my real self, all
myself. I’m dying now, I know I shall die, ask him. Even now I feel—see here, the
weights on my feet, on my hands, on my ﬁngers. My ﬁngers—see how huge they
are! But this will soon all be over…. Only one thing I want: forgive me, forgive
me quite. I’m terrible, but my nurse used to tell me; the holy martyr—what was
her name? She was worse. And I’ll go to Rome; there’s a wilderness, and there

ccclxxiv
I shall be no trouble to any one, only I’ll take Seryozha and the lile one…. No,
you can’t forgive me! I know, it can’t be forgiven! No, no, go away, you’re too
good!" She held his hand in one burning hand, while she pushed him away with
the other.
e nervous agitation of Alexey Alexandrovitch kept increasing, and had by
now reached such a point that he ceased to struggle with it. He suddenly felt that
what he had regarded as nervous agitation was on the contrary a blissful spiritual
condition that gave him all at once a new happiness he had never known. He
did not think that the Christian law that he had been all his life trying to follow,
enjoined on him to forgive and love his enemies; but a glad feeling of love and
forgiveness for his enemies ﬁlled his heart. He knelt down, and laying his head in
the curve of her arm, which burned him as with ﬁre through the sleeve, he sobbed
like a lile child. She put her arm around his head, moved towards him, and with
deﬁant pride lied up her eyes.
"at is he. I knew him! Now, forgive me, everyone, forgive me!… ey’ve
come again; why don’t they go away?… Oh, take these cloaks oﬀ me!"
e doctor unloosed her hands, carefully laying her on the pillow, and covered her up to the shoulders. She lay back submissively, and looked before her
with beaming eyes.
"Remember one thing, that I needed nothing but forgiveness, and I want
nothing more…. Why doesn’t he come?" she said, turning to the door towards
Vronsky. "Do come, do come! Give him your hand."
Vronsky came to the side of the bed, and seeing Anna, again hid his face in
his hands.
"Uncover your face—look at him! He’s a saint," she said. "Oh! uncover your
face, do uncover it!" she said angrily. "Alexey Alexandrovitch, do uncover his
face! I want to see him."
Alexey Alexandrovitch took Vronsky’s hands and drew them away from his
face, which was awful with the expression of agony and shame upon it.
"Give him your hand. Forgive him."
Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, not aempting to restrain the
tears that streamed from his eyes.
"ank God, thank God!" she said, "now everything is ready. Only to stretch
my legs a lile. ere, that’s capital. How badly these ﬂowers are done—not a bit
like a violet," she said, pointing to the hangings. "My God, my God! when will it
end? Give me some morphine. Doctor, give me some morphine! Oh, my God, my
God!"
And she tossed about on the bed.
e doctors said that it was puerperal fever, and that it was ninety-nine
chances in a hundred it would end in death. e whole day long there was fever,

ccclxxv
delirium, and unconsciousness. At midnight the patient lay without consciousness, and almost without pulse.
e end was expected every minute.
Vronsky had gone home, but in the morning he came to inquire, and Alexey
Alexandrovitch meeting him in the hall, said: "Beer stay, she might ask for you,"
and himself led him to his wife’s boudoir. Towards morning, there was a return
again of excitement, rapid thought and talk, and again it ended in unconsciousness. On the third day it was the same thing, and the doctors said there was
hope. at day Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the boudoir where Vronsky was
siing, and closing the door sat down opposite him.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch," said Vronsky, feeling that a statement of the position was coming, "I can’t speak, I can’t understand. Spare me! However hard it is
for you, believe me, it is more terrible for me."
He would have risen; but Alexey Alexandrovitch took him by the hand and
said:
"I beg you to hear me out; it is necessary. I must explain my feelings, the
feelings that have guided me and will guide me, so that you may not be in error
regarding me. You know I had resolved on a divorce, and had even begun to take
proceedings. I won’t conceal from you that in beginning this I was in uncertainty,
I was in misery; I will confess that I was pursued by a desire to revenge myself
on you and on her. When I got the telegram, I came here with the same feelings;
I will say more, I longed for her death. But…." He paused, pondering whether to
disclose or not to disclose his feeling to him. "But I saw her and forgave her. And
the happiness of forgiveness has revealed to me my duty. I forgive completely. I
would oﬀer the other cheek, I would give my cloak if my coat be taken. I pray to
God only not to take from me the bliss of forgiveness!"
Tears stood in his eyes, and the luminous, serene look in them impressed
Vronsky.
"is is my position: you can trample me in the mud, make me the laughingstock of the world, I will not abandon her, and I will never uer a word of reproach
to you," Alexey Alexandrovitch went on. "My duty is clearly marked for me; I
ought to be with her, and I will be. If she wishes to see you, I will let you know,
but now I suppose it would be beer for you to go away."
He got up, and sobs cut short his words. Vronsky too was geing up, and in
a stooping, not yet erect posture, looked up at him from under his brows. He did
not understand Alexey Alexandrovitch’s feeling, but he felt that it was something
higher and even unaainable for him with his view of life.

Chapter 

ccclxxvi
Aer the conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch, Vronsky went out onto the
steps of the Karenins’ house and stood still, with diﬃculty remembering where he
was, and where he ought to walk or drive. He felt disgraced, humiliated, guilty,
and deprived of all possibility of washing away his humiliation. He felt thrust out
of the beaten track along which he had so proudly and lightly walked till then. All
the habits and rules of his life that had seemed so ﬁrm, had turned out suddenly
false and inapplicable. e betrayed husband, who had ﬁgured till that time as a
pitiful creature, an incidental and somewhat ludicrous obstacle to his happiness,
had suddenly been summoned by her herself, elevated to an awe-inspiring pinnacle, and on the pinnacle that husband had shown himself, not malignant, not
false, not ludicrous, but kind and straightforward and large. Vronsky could not
but feel this, and the parts were suddenly reversed. Vronsky felt his elevation and
his own abasement, his truth and his own falsehood. He felt that the husband was
magnanimous even in his sorrow, while he had been base and pey in his deceit.
But this sense of his own humiliation before the man he had unjustly despised
made up only a small part of his misery. He felt unuerably wretched now, for
his passion for Anna, which had seemed to him of late to be growing cooler, now
that he knew he had lost her forever, was stronger than ever it had been. He had
seen all of her in her illness, had come to know her very soul, and it seemed to
him that he had never loved her till then. And now when he had learned to know
her, to love her as she should be loved, he had been humiliated before her, and
had lost her forever, leaving with her nothing of himself but a shameful memory. Most terrible of all had been his ludicrous, shameful position when Alexey
Alexandrovitch had pulled his hands away from his humiliated face. He stood on
the steps of the Karenins’ house like one distraught, and did not know what to do.
"A sledge, sir?" asked the porter.
"Yes, a sledge."
On geing home, aer three sleepless nights, Vronsky, without undressing,
lay down ﬂat on the sofa, clasping his hands and laying his head on them. His head
was heavy. Images, memories, and ideas of the strangest description followed one
another with extraordinary rapidity and vividness. First it was the medicine he
had poured out for the patient and spilt over the spoon, then the midwife’s white
hands, then the queer posture of Alexey Alexandrovitch on the ﬂoor beside the
bed.
"To sleep! To forget!" he said to himself with the serene conﬁdence of a
healthy man that if he is tired and sleepy, he will go to sleep at once. And the
same instant his head did begin to feel drowsy and he began to drop oﬀ into
forgetfulness. e waves of the sea of unconsciousness had begun to meet over
his head, when all at once—it was as though a violent shock of electricity had
passed over him. He started so that he leaped up on the springs of the sofa, and

ccclxxvii
leaning on his arms got in a panic onto his knees. His eyes were wide open as
though he had never been asleep. e heaviness in his head and the weariness in
his limbs that he had felt a minute before had suddenly gone.
"You may trample me in the mud," he heard Alexey Alexandrovitch’s words
and saw him standing before him, and saw Anna’s face with its burning ﬂush
and gliering eyes, gazing with love and tenderness not at him but at Alexey
Alexandrovitch; he saw his own, as he fancied, foolish and ludicrous ﬁgure when
Alexey Alexandrovitch took his hands away from his face. He stretched out his
legs again and ﬂung himself on the sofa in the same position and shut his eyes.
"To sleep! To forget!" he repeated to himself. But with his eyes shut he saw
more distinctly than ever Anna’s face as it had been on the memorable evening
before the races.
"at is not and will not be, and she wants to wipe it out of her memory. But
I cannot live without it. How can we be reconciled? how can we be reconciled?"
he said aloud, and unconsciously began to repeat these words. is repetition
checked the rising up of fresh images and memories, which he felt were thronging
in his brain. But repeating words did not check his imagination for long. Again in
extraordinarily rapid succession his best moments rose before his mind, and then
his recent humiliation. "Take away his hands," Anna’s voice says. He takes away
his hands and feels the shamestruck and idiotic expression of his face.
He still lay down, trying to sleep, though he felt there was not the smallest
hope of it, and kept repeating stray words from some chain of thought, trying by
this to check the rising ﬂood of fresh images. He listened, and heard in a strange,
mad whisper words repeated: "I did not appreciate it, did not make enough of it.
I did not appreciate it, did not make enough of it."
"What’s this? Am I going out of my mind?" he said to himself. "Perhaps.
What makes men go out of their minds; what makes men shoot themselves?" he
answered himself, and opening his eyes, he saw with wonder an embroidered
cushion beside him, worked by Varya, his brother’s wife. He touched the tassel
of the cushion, and tried to think of Varya, of when he had seen her last. But
to think of anything extraneous was an agonizing eﬀort. "No, I must sleep!" He
moved the cushion up, and pressed his head into it, but he had to make an eﬀort
to keep his eyes shut. He jumped up and sat down. "at’s all over for me," he said
to himself. "I must think what to do. What is le?" His mind rapidly ran through
his life apart from his love of Anna.
"Ambition? Serpuhovskoy? Society? e court?" He could not come to a
pause anywhere. All of it had had meaning before, but now there was no reality
in it. He got up from the sofa, took oﬀ his coat, undid his belt, and uncovering
his hairy chest to breathe more freely, walked up and down the room. "is is
how people go mad," he repeated, "and how they shoot themselves … to escape

ccclxxviii
humiliation," he added slowly.
He went to the door and closed it, then with ﬁxed eyes and clenched teeth
he went up to the table, took a revolver, looked round him, turned it to a loaded
barrel, and sank into thought. For two minutes, his head bent forward with an
expression of an intense eﬀort of thought, he stood with the revolver in his hand,
motionless, thinking.
"Of course," he said to himself, as though a logical, continuous, and clear
chain of reasoning had brought him to an indubitable conclusion. In reality this
"of course," that seemed convincing to him, was simply the result of exactly the
same circle of memories and images through which he had passed ten times already during the last hour—memories of happiness lost forever. ere was the
same conception of the senselessness of everything to come in life, the same consciousness of humiliation. Even the sequence of these images and emotions was
the same.
"Of course," he repeated, when for the third time his thought passed again
round the same spellbound circle of memories and images, and pulling the revolver to the le side of his chest, and clutching it vigorously with his whole
hand, as it were, squeezing it in his ﬁst, he pulled the trigger. He did not hear the
sound of the shot, but a violent blow on his chest sent him reeling. He tried to
clutch at the edge of the table, dropped the revolver, staggered, and sat down on
the ground, looking about him in astonishment. He did not recognize his room,
looking up from the ground, at the bent legs of the table, at the wastepaper basket,
and the tiger-skin rug. e hurried, creaking steps of his servant coming through
the drawing room brought him to his senses. He made an eﬀort at thought, and
was aware that he was on the ﬂoor; and seeing blood on the tiger-skin rug and
on his arm, he knew he had shot himself.
"Idiotic! Missed!" he said, fumbling aer the revolver. e revolver was
close beside him—he sought further oﬀ. Still feeling for it, he stretched out to the
other side, and not being strong enough to keep his balance, fell over, streaming
with blood.
e elegant, whiskered manservant, who used to be continually complaining to his acquaintances of the delicacy of his nerves, was so panic-stricken on
seeing his master lying on the ﬂoor, that he le him losing blood while he ran
for assistance. An hour later Varya, his brother’s wife, had arrived, and with the
assistance of three doctors, whom she had sent for in all directions, and who all
appeared at the same moment, she got the wounded man to bed, and remained to
nurse him.

Chapter 

ccclxxix
e mistake made by Alexey Alexandrovitch in that, when preparing for seeing
his wife, he had overlooked the possibility that her repentance might be sincere,
and he might forgive her, and she might not die—this mistake was two months
aer his return from Moscow brought home to him in all its signiﬁcance. But
the mistake made by him had arisen not simply from his having overlooked that
contingency, but also from the fact that until that day of his interview with his
dying wife, he had not known his own heart. At his sick wife’s bedside he had for
the ﬁrst time in his life given way to that feeling of sympathetic suﬀering always
roused in him by the suﬀerings of others, and hitherto looked on by him with
shame as a harmful weakness. And pity for her, and remorse for having desired
her death, and most of all, the joy of forgiveness, made him at once conscious, not
simply of the relief of his own suﬀerings, but of a spiritual peace he had never
experienced before. He suddenly felt that the very thing that was the source of
his suﬀerings had become the source of his spiritual joy; that what had seemed
insoluble while he was judging, blaming, and hating, had become clear and simple
when he forgave and loved.
He forgave his wife and pitied her for her suﬀerings and her remorse. He
forgave Vronsky, and pitied him, especially aer reports reached him of his despairing action. He felt more for his son than before. And he blamed himself now
for having taken too lile interest in him. But for the lile newborn baby he felt
a quite peculiar sentiment, not of pity, only, but of tenderness. At ﬁrst, from a
feeling of compassion alone, he had been interested in the delicate lile creature,
who was not his child, and who was cast on one side during her mother’s illness,
and would certainly have died if he had not troubled about her, and he did not
himself observe how fond he became of her. He would go into the nursery several times a day, and sit there for a long while, so that the nurses, who were at
ﬁrst afraid of him, got quite used to his presence. Sometimes for half an hour
at a stretch he would sit silently gazing at the saﬀron-red, downy, wrinkled face
of the sleeping baby, watching the movements of the frowning brows, and the
fat lile hands, with clenched ﬁngers, that rubbed the lile eyes and nose. At
such moments particularly, Alexey Alexandrovitch had a sense of perfect peace
and inward harmony, and saw nothing extraordinary in his position, nothing that
ought to be changed.
But as time went on, he saw more and more distinctly that however natural
the position now seemed to him, he would not long be allowed to remain in it. He
felt that besides the blessed spiritual force controlling his soul, there was another,
a brutal force, as powerful, or more powerful, which controlled his life, and that
this force would not allow him that humble peace he longed for. He felt that
everyone was looking at him with inquiring wonder, that he was not understood,
and that something was expected of him. Above all, he felt the instability and

ccclxxx
unnaturalness of his relations with his wife.
When the soening eﬀect of the near approach of death had passed away,
Alexey Alexandrovitch began to notice that Anna was afraid of him, ill at ease
with him, and could not look him straight in the face. She seemed to be wanting,
and not daring, to tell him something; and as though foreseeing their present
relations could not continue, she seemed to be expecting something from him.
Towards the end of February it happened that Anna’s baby daughter, who
had been named Anna too, fell ill. Alexey Alexandrovitch was in the nursery
in the morning, and leaving orders for the doctor to be sent for, he went to his
oﬃce. On ﬁnishing his work, he returned home at four. Going into the hall he
saw a handsome groom, in a braided livery and a bear fur cape, holding a white
fur cloak.
"Who is here?" asked Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"Princess Elizaveta Federovna Tverskaya," the groom answered, and it
seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch that he grinned.
During all this diﬃcult time Alexey Alexandrovitch had noticed that his
worldly acquaintances, especially women, took a peculiar interest in him and his
wife. All these acquaintances he observed with diﬃculty concealing their mirth
at something; the same mirth that he had perceived in the lawyer’s eyes, and just
now in the eyes of this groom. Everyone seemed, somehow, hugely delighted, as
though they had just been at a wedding. When they met him, with ill-disguised
enjoyment they inquired aer his wife’s health. e presence of Princess Tverskaya was unpleasant to Alexey Alexandrovitch from the memories associated
with her, and also because he disliked her, and he went straight to the nursery. In
the day nursery Seryozha, leaning on the table with his legs on a chair, was drawing and chaing away merrily. e English governess, who had during Anna’s
illness replaced the French one, was siing near the boy kniing a shawl. She
hurriedly got up, curtseyed, and pulled Seryozha.
Alexey Alexandrovitch stroked his son’s hair, answered the governess’s inquiries about his wife, and asked what the doctor had said of the baby.
"e doctor said it was nothing serious, and he ordered a bath, sir."
"But she is still in pain," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, listening to the baby’s
screaming in the next room.
"I think it’s the wet-nurse, sir," the Englishwoman said ﬁrmly.
"What makes you think so?" he asked, stopping short.
"It’s just as it was at Countess Paul’s, sir. ey gave the baby medicine, and
it turned out that the baby was simply hungry: the nurse had no milk, sir."
Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and aer standing still a few seconds he
went in at the other door. e baby was lying with its head thrown back, stiﬀening
itself in the nurse’s arms, and would not take the plump breast oﬀered it; and it

ccclxxxi
never ceased screaming in spite of the double hushing of the wet-nurse and the
other nurse, who was bending over her.
"Still no beer?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"She’s very restless," answered the nurse in a whisper.
"Miss Edwarde says that perhaps the wet-nurse has no milk," he said.
"I think so too, Alexey Alexandrovitch."
"en why didn’t you say so?"
"Who’s one to say it to? Anna Arkadyevna still ill…" said the nurse discontentedly.
e nurse was an old servant of the family. And in her simple words there
seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch an allusion to his position.
e baby screamed louder than ever, struggling and sobbing. e nurse,
with a gesture of despair, went to it, took it from the wet-nurse’s arms, and began
walking up and down, rocking it.
"You must ask the doctor to examine the wet-nurse," said Alexey Alexandrovitch. e smartly dressed and healthy-looking nurse, frightened at the idea
of losing her place, muered something to herself, and covering her bosom, smiled
contemptuously at the idea of doubts being cast on her abundance of milk. In that
smile, too, Alexey Alexandrovitch saw a sneer at his position.
"Luckless child!" said the nurse, hushing the baby, and still walking up and
down with it.
Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, and with a despondent and suﬀering face
watched the nurse walking to and fro.
When the child at last was still, and had been put in a deep bed, and the
nurse, aer smoothing the lile pillow, had le her, Alexey Alexandrovitch got
up, and walking awkwardly on tiptoe, approached the baby. For a minute he was
still, and with the same despondent face gazed at the baby; but all at once a smile,
that moved his hair and the skin of his forehead, came out on his face, and he
went as soly out of the room.
In the dining room he rang the bell, and told the servant who came in to
send again for the doctor. He felt vexed with his wife for not being anxious about
this exquisite baby, and in this vexed humor he had no wish to go to her; he had
no wish, either, to see Princess Betsy. But his wife might wonder why he did not
go to her as usual; and so, overcoming his disinclination, he went towards the
bedroom. As he walked over the so rug towards the door, he could not help
overhearing a conversation he did not want to hear.
"If he hadn’t been going away, I could have understood your answer and his
too. But your husband ought to be above that," Betsy was saying.
"It’s not for my husband; for myself I don’t wish it. Don’t say that!" answered Anna’s excited voice.

ccclxxxii
"Yes, but you must care to say good-bye to a man who has shot himself on
your account…."
"at’s just why I don’t want to."
With a dismayed and guilty expression, Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped and
would have gone back unobserved. But reﬂecting that this would be undigniﬁed,
he turned back again, and clearing his throat, he went up to the bedroom. e
voices were silent, and he went in.
Anna, in a gray dressing gown, with a crop of short clustering black curls
on her round head, was siing on a seee. e eagerness died out of her face, as
it always did, at the sight of her husband; she dropped her head and looked round
uneasily at Betsy. Betsy, dressed in the height of the latest fashion, in a hat that
towered somewhere over her head like a shade on a lamp, in a blue dress with
violet crossway stripes slanting one way on the bodice and the other way on the
skirt, was siing beside Anna, her tall ﬂat ﬁgure held erect. Bowing her head, she
greeted Alexey Alexandrovitch with an ironical smile.
"Ah!" she said, as though surprised. "I’m very glad you’re at home. You
never put in an appearance anywhere, and I haven’t seen you ever since Anna
has been ill. I have heard all about it—your anxiety. Yes, you’re a wonderful
husband!" she said, with a meaning and aﬀable air, as though she were bestowing
an order of magnanimity on him for his conduct to his wife.
Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed frigidly, and kissing his wife’s hand, asked
how she was.
"Beer, I think," she said, avoiding his eyes.
"But you’ve rather a feverish-looking color," he said, laying stress on the
word "feverish."
"We’ve been talking too much," said Betsy. "I feel it’s selﬁshness on my part,
and I am going away."
She got up, but Anna, suddenly ﬂushing, quickly caught at her hand.
"No, wait a minute, please. I must tell you … no, you." she turned to Alexey
Alexandrovitch, and her neck and brow were suﬀused with crimson. "I won’t and
can’t keep anything secret from you," she said.
Alexey Alexandrovitch cracked his ﬁngers and bowed his head.
"Betsy’s been telling me that Count Vronsky wants to come here to say
good-bye before his departure for Tashkend." She did not look at her husband,
and was evidently in haste to have everything out, however hard it might be for
her. "I told her I could not receive him."
"You said, my dear, that it would depend on Alexey Alexandrovitch," Betsy
corrected her.
"Oh, no, I can’t receive him; and what object would there…." She stopped
suddenly, and glanced inquiringly at her husband (he did not look at her). "In

ccclxxxiii
short, I don’t wish it…."
Alexey Alexandrovitch advanced and would have taken her hand.
Her ﬁrst impulse was to jerk back her hand from the damp hand with big
swollen veins that sought hers, but with an obvious eﬀort to control herself she
pressed his hand.
"I am very grateful to you for your conﬁdence, but…" he said, feeling with
confusion and annoyance that what he could decide easily and clearly by himself,
he could not discuss before Princess Tverskaya, who to him stood for the incarnation of that brute force which would inevitably control him in the life he led in
the eyes of the world, and hinder him from giving way to his feeling of love and
forgiveness. He stopped short, looking at Princess Tverskaya.
"Well, good-bye, my darling," said Betsy, geing up. She kissed Anna, and
went out. Alexey Alexandrovitch escorted her out.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch! I know you are a truly magnanimous man," said
Betsy, stopping in the lile drawing-room, and with special warmth shaking
hands with him once more. "I am an outsider, but I so love her and respect you
that I venture to advise. Receive him. Alexey Vronsky is the soul of honor, and
he is going away to Tashkend."
"ank you, princess, for your sympathy and advice. But the question of
whether my wife can or cannot see anyone she must decide herself."
He said this from habit, liing his brows with dignity, and reﬂected immediately that whatever his words might be, there could be no dignity in his position.
And he saw this by the suppressed, malicious, and ironical smile with which Betsy
glanced at him aer this phrase.

Chapter 
Alexey Alexandrovitch took leave of Betsy in the drawing room, and went to his
wife. She was lying down, but hearing his steps she sat up hastily in her former
aitude, and looked in a scared way at him. He saw she had been crying.
"I am very grateful for your conﬁdence in me." He repeated gently in Russian the phrase he had said in Betsy’s presence in French, and sat down beside
her. When he spoke to her in Russian, using the Russian "thou" of intimacy and
aﬀection, it was insuﬀerably irritating to Anna. "And I am very grateful for your
decision. I, too, imagine that since he is going away, there is no sort of necessity
for Count Vronsky to come here. However, if…"
"But I’ve said so already, so why repeat it?" Anna suddenly interrupted him
with an irritation she could not succeed in repressing. "No sort of necessity," she
thought, "for a man to come and say good-bye to the woman he loves, for whom

ccclxxxiv
he was ready to ruin himself, and has ruined himself, and who cannot live without
him. No sort of necessity!" she compressed her lips, and dropped her burning eyes
to his hands with their swollen veins. ey were rubbing each other.
"Let us never speak of it," she added more calmly.
"I have le this question to you to decide, and I am very glad to see…" Alexey
Alexandrovitch was beginning.
"at my wish coincides with your own," she ﬁnished quickly, exasperated
at his talking so slowly while she knew beforehand all he would say.
"Yes," he assented; "and Princess Tverskaya’s interference in the most diﬃcult private aﬀairs is uerly uncalled for. She especially…"
"I don’t believe a word of what’s said about her," said Anna quickly. "I know
she really cares for me."
Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed and said nothing. She played nervously with
the tassel of her dressing-gown, glancing at him with that torturing sensation of
physical repulsion for which she blamed herself, though she could not control it.
Her only desire now was to be rid of his oppressive presence.
"I have just sent for the doctor," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"I am very well; what do I want the doctor for?"
"No, the lile one cries, and they say the nurse hasn’t enough milk."
"Why didn’t you let me nurse her, when I begged to? Anyway" (Alexey
Alexandrovitch knew what was meant by that "anyway"), "she’s a baby, and
they’re killing her." She rang the bell and ordered the baby to be brought her.
"I begged to nurse her, I wasn’t allowed to, and now I’m blamed for it."
"I don’t blame…"
"Yes, you do blame me! My God! why didn’t I die!" And she broke into
sobs. "Forgive me, I’m nervous, I’m unjust," she said, controlling herself, "but do
go away…"
"No, it can’t go on like this," Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself decidedly
as he le his wife’s room.
Never had the impossibility of his position in the world’s eyes, and his wife’s
hatred of him, and altogether the might of that mysterious brutal force that guided
his life against his spiritual inclinations, and exacted conformity with its decrees
and change in his aitude to his wife, been presented to him with such distinctness as that day. He saw clearly that all the world and his wife expected of him
something, but what exactly, he could not make out. He felt that this was rousing
in his soul a feeling of anger destructive of his peace of mind and of all the good of
his achievement. He believed that for Anna herself it would be beer to break oﬀ
all relations with Vronsky; but if they all thought this out of the question, he was
even ready to allow these relations to be renewed, so long as the children were
not disgraced, and he was not deprived of them nor forced to change his position.

ccclxxxv
Bad as this might be, it was anyway beer than a rupture, which would put her
in a hopeless and shameful position, and deprive him of everything he cared for.
But he felt helpless; he knew beforehand that every one was against him, and
that he would not be allowed to do what seemed to him now so natural and right,
but would be forced to do what was wrong, though it seemed the proper thing to
them.

Chapter 
Before Betsy had time to walk out of the drawing-room, she was met in the doorway by Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just come from Yeliseev’s, where a consignment of fresh oysters had been received.
"Ah! princess! what a delightful meeting!" he began. "I’ve been to see you."
"A meeting for one minute, for I’m going," said Betsy, smiling and puing
on her glove.
"Don’t put on your glove yet, princess; let me kiss your hand. ere’s nothing I’m so thankful to the revival of the old fashions for as the kissing the hand."
He kissed Betsy’s hand. "When shall we see each other?"
"You don’t deserve it," answered Betsy, smiling.
"Oh, yes, I deserve a great deal, for I’ve become a most serious person. I
don’t only manage my own aﬀairs, but other people’s too," he said, with a significant expression.
"Oh, I’m so glad!" answered Betsy, at once understanding that he was speaking of Anna. And going back into the drawing room, they stood in a corner. "He’s
killing her," said Betsy in a whisper full of meaning. "It’s impossible, impossible…"
"I’m so glad you think so," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, shaking his head with
a serious and sympathetically distressed expression, "that’s what I’ve come to
Petersburg for."
"e whole town’s talking of it," she said. "It’s an impossible position. She
pines and pines away. He doesn’t understand that she’s one of those women who
can’t triﬂe with their feelings. One of two things: either let him take her away,
act with energy, or give her a divorce. is is stiﬂing her."
"Yes, yes … just so…" Oblonsky said, sighing. "at’s what I’ve come for. At
least not solely for that … I’ve been made a Kammerherr; of course, one has to say
thank you. But the chief thing was having to sele this."
"Well, God help you!" said Betsy.
Aer accompanying Betsy to the outside hall, once more kissing her hand
above the glove, at the point where the pulse beats, and murmuring to her such
unseemly nonsense that she did not know whether to laugh or be angry, Stepan

ccclxxxvi
Arkadyevitch went to his sister. He found her in tears.
Although he happened to be bubbling over with good spirits, Stepan
Arkadyevitch immediately and quite naturally fell into the sympathetic, poetically emotional tone which harmonized with her mood. He asked her how she
was, and how she had spent the morning.
"Very, very miserably. Today and this morning and all past days and days
to come," she said.
"I think you’re giving way to pessimism. You must rouse yourself, you must
look life in the face. I know it’s hard, but…"
"I have heard it said that women love men even for their vices," Anna began
suddenly, "but I hate him for his virtues. I can’t live with him. Do you understand?
the sight of him has a physical eﬀect on me, it makes me beside myself. I can’t, I
can’t live with him. What am I to do? I have been unhappy, and used to think one
couldn’t be more unhappy, but the awful state of things I am going through now, I
could never have conceived. Would you believe it, that knowing he’s a good man,
a splendid man, that I’m not worth his lile ﬁnger, still I hate him. I hate him for
his generosity. And there’s nothing le for me but…"
She would have said death, but Stepan Arkadyevitch would not let her ﬁnish.
"You are ill and overwrought," he said; "believe me, you’re exaggerating
dreadfully. ere’s nothing so terrible in it."
And Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. No one else in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s
place, having to do with such despair, would have ventured to smile (the smile
would have seemed brutal); but in his smile there was so much of sweetness
and almost feminine tenderness that his smile did not wound, but soened and
soothed. His gentle, soothing words and smiles were as soothing and soening
as almond oil. And Anna soon felt this.
"No, Stiva," she said, "I’m lost, lost! worse than lost! I can’t say yet that all
is over; on the contrary, I feel that it’s not over. I’m an overstrained string that
must snap. But it’s not ended yet … and it will have a fearful end."
"No maer, we must let the string be loosened, lile by lile. ere’s no
position from which there is no way of escape."
"I have thought, and thought. Only one…"
Again he knew from her terriﬁed eyes that this one way of escape in her
thought was death, and he would not let her say it.
"Not at all," he said. "Listen to me. You can’t see your own position as I can.
Let me tell you candidly my opinion." Again he smiled discreetly his almond-oil
smile. "I’ll begin from the beginning. You married a man twenty years older than
yourself. You married him without love and not knowing what love was. It was
a mistake, let’s admit."

ccclxxxvii
"A fearful mistake!" said Anna.
"But I repeat, it’s an accomplished fact. en you had, let us say, the misfortune to love a man not your husband. at was a misfortune; but that, too, is an
accomplished fact. And your husband knew it and forgave it." He stopped at each
sentence, waiting for her to object, but she made no answer. "at’s so. Now the
question is: can you go on living with your husband? Do you wish it? Does he
wish it?"
"I know nothing, nothing."
"But you said yourself that you can’t endure him."
"No, I didn’t say so. I deny it. I can’t tell, I don’t know anything about it."
"Yes, but let…"
"You can’t understand. I feel I’m lying head downwards in a sort of pit, but
I ought not to save myself. And I can’t . . ."
"Never mind, we’ll slip something under and pull you out. I understand
you: I understand that you can’t take it on yourself to express your wishes, your
feelings."
"ere’s nothing, nothing I wish … except for it to be all over."
"But he sees this and knows it. And do you suppose it weighs on him any
less than on you? You’re wretched, he’s wretched, and what good can come of
it? while divorce would solve the diﬃculty completely." With some eﬀort Stepan
Arkadyevitch brought out his central idea, and looked signiﬁcantly at her.
She said nothing, and shook her cropped head in dissent. But from the look
in her face, that suddenly brightened into its old beauty, he saw that if she did not
desire this, it was simply because it seemed to her unaainable happiness.
"I’m awfully sorry for you! And how happy I should be if I could arrange
things!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling more boldly. "Don’t speak, don’t say
a word! God grant only that I may speak as I feel. I’m going to him."
Anna looked at him with dreamy, shining eyes, and said nothing.

Chapter 
Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the same somewhat solemn expression with which
he used to take his presidential chair at his board, walked into Alexey Alexandrovitch’s room. Alexey Alexandrovitch was walking about his room with his
hands behind his back, thinking of just what Stepan Arkadyevitch had been discussing with his wife.
"I’m not interrupting you?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, on the sight of his
brother-in-law becoming suddenly aware of a sense of embarrassment unusual
with him. To conceal this embarrassment he took out a cigaree case he had just

ccclxxxviii
bought that opened in a new way, and sniﬃng the leather, took a cigaree out of
it.
"No. Do you want anything?" Alexey Alexandrovitch asked without eagerness.
"Yes, I wished … I wanted … yes, I wanted to talk to you," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, with surprise aware of an unaccustomed timidity.
is feeling was so unexpected and so strange that he did not believe it was
the voice of conscience telling him that what he was meaning to do was wrong.
Stepan Arkadyevitch made an eﬀort and struggled with the timidity that
had come over him.
"I hope you believe in my love for my sister and my sincere aﬀection and
respect for you," he said, reddening.
Alexey Alexandrovitch stood still and said nothing, but his face struck
Stepan Arkadyevitch by its expression of an unresisting sacriﬁce.
"I intended … I wanted to have a lile talk with you about my sister and
your mutual position," he said, still struggling with an unaccustomed constraint.
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled mournfully, looked at his brother-in-law, and
without answering went up to the table, took from it an unﬁnished leer, and
handed it to his brother-in-law.
"I think unceasingly of the same thing. And here is what I had begun writing, thinking I could say it beer by leer, and that my presence irritates her," he
said, as he gave him the leer.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took the leer, looked with incredulous surprise at the
lusterless eyes ﬁxed so immovably on him, and began to read.
"I see that my presence is irksome to you. Painful as it is to me to believe it, I
see that it is so, and cannot be otherwise. I don’t blame you, and God is my witness
that on seeing you at the time of your illness I resolved with my whole heart to
forget all that had passed between us and to begin a new life. I do not regret, and
shall never regret, what I have done; but I have desired one thing—your good, the
good of your soul—and now I see I have not aained that. Tell me yourself what
will give you true happiness and peace to your soul. I put myself entirely in your
hands, and trust to your feeling of what’s right."
Stepan Arkadyevitch handed back the leer, and with the same surprise
continued looking at his brother-in-law, not knowing what to say. is silence
was so awkward for both of them that Stepan Arkadyevitch’s lips began twitching
nervously, while he still gazed without speaking at Karenin’s face.
"at’s what I wanted to say to her," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, turning
away.
"Yes, yes…" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, not able to answer for the tears that
were choking him.

ccclxxxix
"Yes, yes, I understand you," he brought out at last.
"I want to know what she would like," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"I am afraid she does not understand her own position. She is not a judge,"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, recovering himself. "She is crushed, simply crushed by
your generosity. If she were to read this leer, she would be incapable of saying
anything, she would only hang her head lower than ever."
"Yes, but what’s to be done in that case? how explain, how ﬁnd out her
wishes?"
"If you will allow me to give my opinion, I think that it lies with you to point
out directly the steps you consider necessary to end the position."
"So you consider it must be ended?" Alexey Alexandrovitch interrupted him.
"But how?" he added, with a gesture of his hands before his eyes not usual with
him. "I see no possible way out of it."
"ere is some way of geing out of every position," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, standing up and becoming more cheerful. "ere was a time when you
thought of breaking oﬀ…. If you are convinced now that you cannot make each
other happy…"
"Happiness may be variously understood. But suppose that I agree to everything, that I want nothing: what way is there of geing out of our position?"
"If you care to know my opinion," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with the same
smile of soening, almond-oil tenderness with which he had been talking to Anna.
His kindly smile was so winning that Alexey Alexandrovitch, feeling his own
weakness and unconsciously swayed by it, was ready to believe what Stepan
Arkadyevitch was saying.
"She will never speak out about it. But one thing is possible, one thing she
might desire," he went on, "that is the cessation of your relations and all memories
associated with them. To my thinking, in your position what’s essential is the
formation of a new aitude to one another. And that can only rest on a basis of
freedom on both sides."
"Divorce," Alexey Alexandrovitch interrupted, in a tone of aversion.
"Yes, I imagine that divorce—yes, divorce," Stepan Arkadyevitch repeated,
reddening. "at is from every point of view the most rational course for married people who ﬁnd themselves in the position you are in. What can be done if
married people ﬁnd that life is impossible for them together? at may always
happen."
Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed heavily and closed his eyes.
"ere’s only one point to be considered: is either of the parties desirous
of forming new ties? If not, it is very simple," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, feeling
more and more free from constraint.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, scowling with emotion, muered something to

cccxc
himself, and made no answer. All that seemed so simple to Stepan Arkadyevitch,
Alexey Alexandrovitch had thought over thousands of times. And, so far from being simple, it all seemed to him uerly impossible. Divorce, the details of which
he knew by this time, seemed to him now out of the question, because the sense
of his own dignity and respect for religion forbade his taking upon himself a ﬁctitious charge of adultery, and still more suﬀering his wife, pardoned and beloved
by him, to be caught in the fact and put to public shame. Divorce appeared to him
impossible also on other still more weighty grounds.
What would become of his son in case of a divorce? To leave him with
his mother was out of the question. e divorced mother would have her own
illegitimate family, in which his position as a stepson and his education would
not be good. Keep him with him? He knew that would be an act of vengeance on
his part, and that he did not want. But apart from this, what more than all made
divorce seem impossible to Alexey Alexandrovitch was, that by consenting to a
divorce he would be completely ruining Anna. e saying of Darya Alexandrovna
at Moscow, that in deciding on a divorce he was thinking of himself, and not
considering that by this he would be ruining her irrevocably, had sunk into his
heart. And connecting this saying with his forgiveness of her, with his devotion
to the children, he understood it now in his own way. To consent to a divorce,
to give her her freedom, meant in his thoughts to take from himself the last tie
that bound him to life—the children whom he loved; and to take from her the
last prop that stayed her on the path of right, to thrust her down to her ruin. If
she were divorced, he knew she would join her life to Vronsky’s, and their tie
would be an illegitimate and criminal one, since a wife, by the interpretation of
the ecclesiastical law, could not marry while her husband was living. "She will
join him, and in a year or two he will throw her over, or she will form a new tie,"
thought Alexey Alexandrovitch. "And I, by agreeing to an unlawful divorce, shall
be to blame for her ruin." He had thought it all over hundreds of times, and was
convinced that a divorce was not at all simple, as Stepan Arkadyevitch had said,
but was uerly impossible. He did not believe a single word Stepan Arkadyevitch
said to him; to every word he had a thousand objections to make, but he listened
to him, feeling that his words were the expression of that mighty brutal force
which controlled his life and to which he would have to submit.
"e only question is on what terms you agree to give her a divorce. She
does not want anything, does not dare ask you for anything, she leaves it all to
your generosity."
"My God, my God! what for?" thought Alexey Alexandrovitch, remembering the details of divorce proceedings in which the husband took the blame on
himself, and with just the same gesture with which Vronsky had done the same,
he hid his face for shame in his hands.

cccxci
"You are distressed, I understand that. But if you think it over…"
"Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also;
and if any man take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also," thought Alexey
Alexandrovitch.
"Yes, yes!" he cried in a shrill voice. "I will take the disgrace on myself, I will
give up even my son, but … but wouldn’t it be beer to let it alone? Still you may
do as you like…"
And turning away so that his brother-in-law could not see him, he sat down
on a chair at the window. ere was bierness, there was shame in his heart,
but with bierness and shame he felt joy and emotion at the height of his own
meekness.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was touched. He was silent for a space.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch, believe me, she appreciates your generosity," he
said. "But it seems it was the will of God," he added, and as he said it felt how
foolish a remark it was, and with diﬃculty repressed a smile at his own foolishness.
Alexey Alexandrovitch would have made some reply, but tears stopped him.
"is is an unhappy fatality, and one must accept it as such. I accept the
calamity as an accomplished fact, and am doing my best to help both her and
you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
When he went out of his brother-in-law’s room he was touched, but that
did not prevent him from being glad he had successfully brought the maer to a
conclusion, for he felt certain Alexey Alexandrovitch would not go back on his
words. To this satisfaction was added the fact that an idea had just struck him
for a riddle turning on his successful achievement, that when the aﬀair was over
he would ask his wife and most intimate friends. He put this riddle into two or
three diﬀerent ways. "But I’ll work it out beer than that," he said to himself with
a smile.

Chapter 
Vronsky’s wound had been a dangerous one, though it did not touch the heart,
and for several days he had lain between life and death. e ﬁrst time he was able
to speak, Varya, his brother’s wife, was alone in the room.
"Varya," he said, looking sternly at her, "I shot myself by accident. And
please never speak of it, and tell everyone so. Or else it’s too ridiculous."
Without answering his words, Varya bent over him, and with a delighted
smile gazed into his face. His eyes were clear, not feverish; but their expression
was stern.

cccxcii
"ank God!" she said. "You’re not in pain?"
"A lile here." He pointed to his breast.
"en let me change your bandages."
In silence, stiﬀening his broad jaws, he looked at her while she bandaged
him up. When she had ﬁnished he said:
"I’m not delirious. Please manage that there may be no talk of my having
shot myself on purpose."
"No one does say so. Only I hope you won’t shoot yourself by accident any
more," she said, with a questioning smile.
"Of course I won’t, but it would have been beer…"
And he smiled gloomily.
In spite of these words and this smile, which so frightened Varya, when the
inﬂammation was over and he began to recover, he felt that he was completely
free from one part of his misery. By his action he had, as it were, washed away
the shame and humiliation he had felt before. He could now think calmly of
Alexey Alexandrovitch. He recognized all his magnanimity, but he did not now
feel himself humiliated by it. Besides, he got back again into the beaten track of his
life. He saw the possibility of looking men in the face again without shame, and
he could live in accordance with his own habits. One thing he could not pluck out
of his heart, though he never ceased struggling with it, was the regret, amounting
to despair, that he had lost her forever. at now, having expiated his sin against
the husband, he was bound to renounce her, and never in future to stand between
her with her repentance and her husband, he had ﬁrmly decided in his heart; but
he could not tear out of his heart his regret at the loss of her love, he could not
erase from his memory those moments of happiness that he had so lile prized at
the time, and that haunted him in all their charm.
Serpuhovskoy had planned his appointment at Tashkend, and Vronsky
agreed to the proposition without the slightest hesitation. But the nearer the
time of departure came, the bierer was the sacriﬁce he was making to what he
thought his duty.
His wound had healed, and he was driving about making preparations for
his departure for Tashkend.
"To see her once and then to bury myself, to die," he thought, and as he
was paying farewell visits, he uered this thought to Betsy. Charged with this
commission, Betsy had gone to Anna, and brought him back a negative reply.
"So much the beer," thought Vronsky, when he received the news. "It was
a weakness, which would have shaered what strength I have le."
Next day Betsy herself came to him in the morning, and announced that
she had heard through Oblonsky as a positive fact that Alexey Alexandrovitch
had agreed to a divorce, and that therefore Vronsky could see Anna.

cccxciii
Without even troubling himself to see Betsy out of his ﬂat, forgeing all
his resolutions, without asking when he could see her, where her husband was,
Vronsky drove straight to the Karenins’. He ran up the stairs seeing no one and
nothing, and with a rapid step, almost breaking into a run, he went into her room.
And without considering, without noticing whether there was anyone in the room
or not, he ﬂung his arms round her, and began to cover her face, her hands, her
neck with kisses.
Anna had been preparing herself for this meeting, had thought what she
would say to him, but she did not succeed in saying anything of it; his passion
mastered her. She tried to calm him, to calm herself, but it was too late. His feeling
infected her. Her lips trembled so that for a long while she could say nothing.
"Yes, you have conquered me, and I am yours," she said at last, pressing his
hands to her bosom.
"So it had to be," he said. "So long as we live, it must be so. I know it now."
"at’s true," she said, geing whiter and whiter, and embracing his head.
"Still there is something terrible in it aer all that has happened."
"It will all pass, it will all pass; we shall be so happy. Our love, if it could
be stronger, will be strengthened by there being something terrible in it," he said,
liing his head and parting his strong teeth in a smile.
And she could not but respond with a smile—not to his words, but to the
love in his eyes. She took his hand and stroked her chilled cheeks and cropped
head with it.
"I don’t know you with this short hair. You’ve grown so prey. A boy. But
how pale you are!"
"Yes, I’m very weak," she said, smiling. And her lips began trembling again.
"We’ll go to Italy; you will get strong," he said.
"Can it be possible we could be like husband and wife, alone, your family
with you?" she said, looking close into his eyes.
"It only seems strange to me that it can ever have been otherwise."
"Stiva says that he has agreed to everything, but I can’t accept his generosity," she said, looking dreamily past Vronsky’s face. "I don’t want a divorce; it’s
all the same to me now. Only I don’t know what he will decide about Seryozha."
He could not conceive how at this moment of their meeting she could remember and think of her son, of divorce. What did it all maer?
"Don’t speak of that, don’t think of it," he said, turning her hand in his, and
trying to draw her aention to him; but still she did not look at him.
"Oh, why didn’t I die! it would have been beer," she said, and silent tears
ﬂowed down both her cheeks; but she tried to smile, so as not to wound him.
To decline the ﬂaering and dangerous appointment at Tashkend would
have been, Vronsky had till then considered, disgraceful and impossible. But now,

without an instant’s consideration, he declined it, and observing dissatisfaction
in the most exalted quarters at this step, he immediately retired from the army.
A month later Alexey Alexandrovitch was le alone with his son in his
house at Petersburg, while Anna and Vronsky had gone abroad, not having obtained a divorce, but having absolutely declined all idea of one.

PART FIVE
Chapter 
Princess Shtcherbatskaya considered that it was out of the question for the wedding to take place before Lent, just ﬁve weeks oﬀ, since not half the trousseau
could possibly be ready by that time. But she could not but agree with Levin that
to ﬁx it for aer Lent would be puing it oﬀ too late, as an old aunt of Prince
Shtcherbatsky’s was seriously ill and might die, and then the mourning would
delay the wedding still longer. And therefore, deciding to divide the trousseau
into two parts—a larger and smaller trousseau—the princess consented to have
the wedding before Lent. She determined that she would get the smaller part of
the trousseau all ready now, and the larger part should be made later, and she was
much vexed with Levin because he was incapable of giving her a serious answer
to the question whether he agreed to this arrangement or not. e arrangement
was the more suitable as, immediately aer the wedding, the young people were
to go to the country, where the more important part of the trousseau would not
be wanted.
Levin still continued in the same delirious condition in which it seemed to
him that he and his happiness constituted the chief and sole aim of all existence,
and that he need not now think or care about anything, that everything was being
done and would be done for him by others. He had not even plans and aims for
the future, he le its arrangement to others, knowing that everything would be
delightful. His brother Sergey Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch, and the princess
guided him in doing what he had to do. All he did was to agree entirely with
everything suggested to him. His brother raised money for him, the princess

cccxcv
advised him to leave Moscow aer the wedding. Stepan Arkadyevitch advised
him to go abroad. He agreed to everything. "Do what you choose, if it amuses
you. I’m happy, and my happiness can be no greater and no less for anything you
do," he thought. When he told Kiy of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s advice that they
should go abroad, he was much surprised that she did not agree to this, and had
some deﬁnite requirements of her own in regard to their future. She knew Levin
had work he loved in the country. She did not, as he saw, understand this work,
she did not even care to understand it. But that did not prevent her from regarding
it as a maer of great importance. And then she knew their home would be in
the country, and she wanted to go, not abroad where she was not going to live,
but to the place where their home would be. is deﬁnitely expressed purpose
astonished Levin. But since he did not care either way, he immediately asked
Stepan Arkadyevitch, as though it were his duty, to go down to the country and
to arrange everything there to the best of his ability with the taste of which he
had so much.
"But I say," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to him one day aer he had come
back from the country, where he had got everything ready for the young people’s
arrival, "have you a certiﬁcate of having been at confession?"
"No. But what of it?"
"You can’t be married without it."
"Aïe, aïe, aïe!" cried Levin. "Why, I believe it’s nine years since I’ve taken
the sacrament! I never thought of it."
"You’re a prey fellow!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch laughing, "and you call
me a Nihilist! But this won’t do, you know. You must take the sacrament."
"When? ere are four days le now."
Stepan Arkadyevitch arranged this also, and Levin had to go to confession.
To Levin, as to any unbeliever who respects the beliefs of others, it was exceedingly disagreeable to be present at and take part in church ceremonies. At this
moment, in his present soened state of feeling, sensitive to everything, this inevitable act of hypocrisy was not merely painful to Levin, it seemed to him uerly
impossible. Now, in the heyday of his highest glory, his fullest ﬂower, he would
have to be a liar or a scoﬀer. He felt incapable of being either. But though he
repeatedly plied Stepan Arkadyevitch with questions as to the possibility of obtaining a certiﬁcate without actually communicating, Stepan Arkadyevitch maintained that it was out of the question.
"Besides, what is it to you—two days? And he’s an awfully nice clever old
fellow. He’ll pull the tooth out for you so gently, you won’t notice it."
Standing at the ﬁrst litany, Levin aempted to revive in himself his youthful
recollections of the intense religious emotion he had passed through between the
ages of sixteen and seventeen.

cccxcvi
But he was at once convinced that it was uerly impossible to him. He
aempted to look at it all as an empty custom, having no sort of meaning, like
the custom of paying calls. But he felt that he could not do that either. Levin
found himself, like the majority of his contemporaries, in the vaguest position
in regard to religion. Believe he could not, and at the same time he had no ﬁrm
conviction that it was all wrong. And consequently, not being able to believe in
the signiﬁcance of what he was doing nor to regard it with indiﬀerence as an
empty formality, during the whole period of preparing for the sacrament he was
conscious of a feeling of discomfort and shame at doing what he did not himself
understand, and what, as an inner voice told him, was therefore false and wrong.
During the service he would ﬁrst listen to the prayers, trying to aach some
meaning to them not discordant with his own views; then feeling that he could
not understand and must condemn them, he tried not to listen to them, but to
aend to the thoughts, observations, and memories which ﬂoated through his
brain with extreme vividness during this idle time of standing in church.
He had stood through the litany, the evening service and the midnight service, and the next day he got up earlier than usual, and without having tea went
at eight o’clock in the morning to the church for the morning service and the
confession.
ere was no one in the church but a beggar soldier, two old women, and
the church oﬃcials. A young deacon, whose long back showed in two distinct
halves through his thin undercassock, met him, and at once going to a lile table
at the wall read the exhortation. During the reading, especially at the frequent and
rapid repetition of the same words, "Lord, have mercy on us!" which resounded
with an echo, Levin felt that thought was shut and sealed up, and that it must
not be touched or stirred now or confusion would be the result; and so standing
behind the deacon he went on thinking of his own aﬀairs, neither listening nor
examining what was said. "It’s wonderful what expression there is in her hand,"
he thought, remembering how they had been siing the day before at a corner
table. ey had nothing to talk about, as was almost always the case at this time,
and laying her hand on the table she kept opening and shuing it, and laughed
herself as she watched her action. He remembered how he had kissed it and then
had examined the lines on the pink palm. "Have mercy on us again!" thought
Levin, crossing himself, bowing, and looking at the supple spring of the deacon’s
back bowing before him. "She took my hand then and examined the lines ‘You’ve
got a splendid hand,’ she said." And he looked at his own hand and the short hand
of the deacon. "Yes, now it will soon be over," he thought. "No, it seems to be
beginning again," he thought, listening to the prayers. "No, it’s just ending: there
he is bowing down to the ground. at’s always at the end."
e deacon’s hand in a plush cuﬀ accepted a three-rouble note unobtru-

cccxcvii
sively, and the deacon said he would put it down in the register, and his new
boots creaking jauntily over the ﬂagstones of the empty church, he went to the
altar. A moment later he peeped out thence and beckoned to Levin. ought, till
then locked up, began to stir in Levin’s head, but he made haste to drive it away.
"It will come right somehow," he thought, and went towards the altar-rails. He
went up the steps, and turning to the right saw the priest. e priest, a lile old
man with a scanty grizzled beard and weary, good-natured eyes, was standing at
the altar-rails, turning over the pages of a missal. With a slight bow to Levin he
began immediately reading prayers in the oﬃcial voice. When he had ﬁnished
them he bowed down to the ground and turned, facing Levin.
"Christ is present here unseen, receiving your confession," he said, pointing
to the cruciﬁx. "Do you believe in all the doctrines of the Holy Apostolic Church?"
the priest went on, turning his eyes away from Levin’s face and folding his hands
under his stole.
"I have doubted, I doubt everything," said Levin in a voice that jarred on
himself, and he ceased speaking.
e priest waited a few seconds to see if he would not say more, and closing
his eyes he said quickly, with a broad, Vladimirsky accent:
"Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind, but we must pray that God
in His mercy will strengthen us. What are your special sins?" he added, without
the slightest interval, as though anxious not to waste time.
"My chief sin is doubt. I have doubts of everything, and for the most part I
am in doubt."
"Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind," the priest repeated the same
words. "What do you doubt about principally?"
"I doubt of everything. I sometimes even have doubts of the existence of
God," Levin could not help saying, and he was horriﬁed at the impropriety of
what he was saying. But Levin’s words did not, it seemed, make much impression
on the priest.
"What sort of doubt can there be of the existence of God?" he said hurriedly,
with a just perceptible smile.
Levin did not speak.
"What doubt can you have of the Creator when you behold His creation?"
the priest went on in the rapid customary jargon. "Who has decked the heavenly
ﬁrmament with its lights? Who has clothed the earth in its beauty? How explain
it without the Creator?" he said, looking inquiringly at Levin.
Levin felt that it would be improper to enter upon a metaphysical discussion
with the priest, and so he said in reply merely what was a direct answer to the
question.
"I don’t know," he said.

cccxcviii
"You don’t know! en how can you doubt that God created all?" the priest
said, with good-humored perplexity.
"I don’t understand it at all," said Levin, blushing, and feeling that his words
were stupid, and that they could not be anything but stupid in such a position.
"Pray to God and beseech Him. Even the holy fathers had doubts, and
prayed to God to strengthen their faith. e devil has great power, and we must
resist him. Pray to God, beseech Him. Pray to God," he repeated hurriedly.
e priest paused for some time, as though meditating.
"You’re about, I hear, to marry the daughter of my parishioner and son in
the spirit, Prince Shtcherbatsky?" he resumed, with a smile. "An excellent young
lady."
"Yes," answered Levin, blushing for the priest. "What does he want to ask
me about this at confession for?" he thought.
And, as though answering his thought, the priest said to him:
"You are about to enter into holy matrimony, and God may bless you with
oﬀspring. Well, what sort of bringing-up can you give your babes if you do not
overcome the temptation of the devil, enticing you to inﬁdelity?" he said, with
gentle reproachfulness. "If you love your child as a good father, you will not desire
only wealth, luxury, honor for your infant; you will be anxious for his salvation,
his spiritual enlightenment with the light of truth. Eh? What answer will you
make him when the innocent babe asks you: ‘Papa! who made all that enchants
me in this world—the earth, the waters, the sun, the ﬂowers, the grass?’ Can you
say to him: ‘I don’t know’? You cannot but know, since the Lord God in His
inﬁnite mercy has revealed it to us. Or your child will ask you: ‘What awaits me
in the life beyond the tomb?’ What will you say to him when you know nothing?
How will you answer him? Will you leave him to the allurements of the world
and the devil? at’s not right," he said, and he stopped, puing his head on one
side and looking at Levin with his kindly, gentle eyes.
Levin made no answer this time, not because he did not want to enter upon
a discussion with the priest, but because, so far, no one had ever asked him such
questions, and when his babes did ask him those questions, it would be time
enough to think about answering them.
"You are entering upon a time of life," pursued the priest, "when you must
choose your path and keep to it. Pray to God that He may in His mercy aid you
and have mercy on you!" he concluded. "Our Lord and God, Jesus Christ, in the
abundance and riches of His lovingkindness, forgives this child…" and, ﬁnishing
the prayer of absolution, the priest blessed him and dismissed him.
On geing home that day, Levin had a delightful sense of relief at the awkward position being over and having been got through without his having to tell
a lie. Apart from this, there remained a vague memory that what the kind, nice

cccxcix
old fellow had said had not been at all so stupid as he had fancied at ﬁrst, and that
there was something in it that must be cleared up.
"Of course, not now," thought Levin, "but some day later on." Levin felt more
than ever now that there was something not clear and not clean in his soul, and
that, in regard to religion, he was in the same position which he perceived so
clearly and disliked in others, and for which he blamed his friend Sviazhsky.
Levin spent that evening with his betrothed at Dolly’s, and was in very
high spirits. To explain to Stepan Arkadyevitch the state of excitement in which
he found himself, he said that he was happy like a dog being trained to jump
through a hoop, who, having at last caught the idea, and done what was required
of him, whines and wags its tail, and jumps up to the table and the windows in its
delight.

Chapter 
On the day of the wedding, according to the Russian custom (the princess and
Darya Alexandrovna insisted on strictly keeping all the customs), Levin did not
see his betrothed, and dined at his hotel with three bachelor friends, casually
brought together at his rooms. ese were Sergey Ivanovitch, Katavasov, a university friend, now professor of natural science, whom Levin had met in the street
and insisted on taking home with him, and Tchirikov, his best man, a Moscow
conciliation-board judge, Levin’s companion in his bear-hunts. e dinner was
a very merry one: Sergey Ivanovitch was in his happiest mood, and was much
amused by Katavasov’s originality. Katavasov, feeling his originality was appreciated and understood, made the most of it. Tchirikov always gave a lively and
good-humored support to conversation of any sort.
"See, now," said Katavasov, drawling his words from a habit acquired in the
lecture-room, "what a capable fellow was our friend Konstantin Dmitrievitch. I’m
not speaking of present company, for he’s absent. At the time he le the university
he was fond of science, took an interest in humanity; now one-half of his abilities
is devoted to deceiving himself, and the other to justifying the deceit."
"A more determined enemy of matrimony than you I never saw," said Sergey
Ivanovitch.
"Oh, no, I’m not an enemy of matrimony. I’m in favor of division of labor.
People who can do nothing else ought to rear people while the rest work for their
happiness and enlightenment. at’s how I look at it. To muddle up two trades is
the error of the amateur; I’m not one of their number."
"How happy I shall be when I hear that you’re in love!" said Levin. "Please
invite me to the wedding."

cd
"I’m in love now."
"Yes, with a culeﬁsh! You know," Levin turned to his brother, "Mihail Semyonovitch is writing a work on the digestive organs of the…"
"Now, make a muddle of it! It doesn’t maer what about. And the fact is, I
certainly do love culeﬁsh."
"But that’s no hindrance to your loving your wife."
"e culeﬁsh is no hindrance. e wife is the hindrance."
"Why so?"
"Oh, you’ll see! You care about farming, hunting,—well, you’d beer look
out!"
"Arhip was here today; he said there were a lot of elks in Prudno, and two
bears," said Tchirikov.
"Well, you must go and get them without me."
"Ah, that’s the truth," said Sergey Ivanovitch. "And you may say good-bye
to bear-hunting for the future—your wife won’t allow it!"
Levin smiled. e picture of his wife not leing him go was so pleasant that
he was ready to renounce the delights of looking upon bears forever.
"Still, it’s a pity they should get those two bears without you. Do you remember last time at Hapilovo? at was a delightful hunt!" said Tchirikov.
Levin had not the heart to disillusion him of the notion that there could be
something delightful apart from her, and so said nothing.
"ere’s some sense in this custom of saying good-bye to bachelor life," said
Sergey Ivanovitch. "However happy you may be, you must regret your freedom."
"And confess there is a feeling that you want to jump out of the window,
like Gogol’s bridegroom?"
"Of course there is, but it isn’t confessed," said Katavasov, and he broke into
loud laughter.
"Oh, well, the window’s open. Let’s start oﬀ this instant to Tver! ere’s a
big she-bear; one can go right up to the lair. Seriously, let’s go by the ﬁve o’clock!
And here let them do what they like," said Tchirikov, smiling.
"Well, now, on my honor," said Levin, smiling, "I can’t ﬁnd in my heart that
feeling of regret for my freedom."
"Yes, there’s such a chaos in your heart just now that you can’t ﬁnd anything
there," said Katavasov. "Wait a bit, when you set it to rights a lile, you’ll ﬁnd it!"
"No; if so, I should have felt a lile, apart from my feeling" (he could not say
love before them) "and happiness, a certain regret at losing my freedom…. On the
contrary, I am glad at the very loss of my freedom."
"Awful! It’s a hopeless case!" said Katavasov. "Well, let’s drink to his recovery, or wish that a hundredth part of his dreams may be realized—and that would
be happiness such as never has been seen on earth!"

cdi
Soon aer dinner the guests went away to be in time to be dressed for the
wedding.
When he was le alone, and recalled the conversation of these bachelor
friends, Levin asked himself: had he in his heart that regret for his freedom of
which they had spoken? He smiled at the question. "Freedom! What is freedom
for? Happiness is only in loving and wishing her wishes, thinking her thoughts,
that is to say, not freedom at all—that’s happiness!"
"But do I know her ideas, her wishes, her feelings?" some voice suddenly
whispered to him. e smile died away from his face, and he grew thoughtful.
And suddenly a strange feeling came upon him. ere came over him a dread and
doubt—doubt of everything.
"What if she does not love me? What if she’s marrying me simply to be
married? What if she doesn’t see herself what she’s doing?" he asked himself.
"She may come to her senses, and only when she is being married realize that she
does not and cannot love me." And strange, most evil thoughts of her began to
come to him. He was jealous of Vronsky, as he had been a year ago, as though
the evening he had seen her with Vronsky had been yesterday. He suspected she
had not told him everything.
He jumped up quickly. "No, this can’t go on!" he said to himself in despair.
"I’ll go to her; I’ll ask her; I’ll say for the last time: we are free, and hadn’t we
beer stay so? Anything’s beer than endless misery, disgrace, unfaithfulness!"
With despair in his heart and bier anger against all men, against himself, against
her, he went out of the hotel and drove to her house.
He found her in one of the back rooms. She was siing on a chest and making some arrangements with her maid, sorting over heaps of dresses of diﬀerent
colors, spread on the backs of chairs and on the ﬂoor.
"Ah!" she cried, seeing him, and beaming with delight. "Kostya! Konstantin
Dmitrievitch!" (ese laer days she used these names almost alternately.) "I
didn’t expect you! I’m going through my wardrobe to see what’s for whom…"
"Oh! that’s very nice!" he said gloomily, looking at the maid.
"You can go, Dunyasha, I’ll call you presently," said Kiy. "Kostya, what’s
the maer?" she asked, deﬁnitely adopting this familiar name as soon as the maid
had gone out. She noticed his strange face, agitated and gloomy, and a panic came
over her.
"Kiy! I’m in torture. I can’t suﬀer alone," he said with despair in his voice,
standing before her and looking imploringly into her eyes. He saw already from
her loving, truthful face, that nothing could come of what he had meant to say,
but yet he wanted her to reassure him herself. "I’ve come to say that there’s still
time. is can all be stopped and set right."
"What? I don’t understand. What is the maer?"

cdii
"What I have said a thousand times over, and can’t help thinking … that
I’m not worthy of you. You couldn’t consent to marry me. ink a lile. You’ve
made a mistake. ink it over thoroughly. You can’t love me…. If … beer say
so," he said, not looking at her. "I shall be wretched. Let people say what they
like; anything’s beer than misery…. Far beer now while there’s still time…."
"I don’t understand," she answered, panic-stricken; "you mean you want to
give it up … don’t want it?"
"Yes, if you don’t love me."
"You’re out of your mind!" she cried, turning crimson with vexation. But his
face was so piteous, that she restrained her vexation, and ﬂinging some clothes
oﬀ an arm-chair, she sat down beside him. "What are you thinking? tell me all."
"I am thinking you can’t love me. What can you love me for?"
"My God! what can I do?…" she said, and burst into tears.
"Oh! what have I done?" he cried, and kneeling before her, he fell to kissing
her hands.
When the princess came into the room ﬁve minutes later, she found them
completely reconciled. Kiy had not simply assured him that she loved him, but
had gone so far—in answer to his question, what she loved him for—as to explain
what for. She told him that she loved him because she understood him completely,
because she knew what he would like, and because everything he liked was good.
And this seemed to him perfectly clear. When the princess came to them, they
were siing side by side on the chest, sorting the dresses and disputing over Kiy’s
wanting to give Dunyasha the brown dress she had been wearing when Levin
proposed to her, while he insisted that that dress must never be given away, but
Dunyasha must have the blue one.
"How is it you don’t see? She’s a brunee, and it won’t suit her…. I’ve
worked it all out."
Hearing why he had come, the princess was half humorously, half seriously angry with him, and sent him home to dress and not to hinder Kiy’s hairdressing, as Charles the hair-dresser was just coming.
"As it is, she’s been eating nothing lately and is losing her looks, and then
you must come and upset her with your nonsense," she said to him. "Get along
with you, my dear!"
Levin, guilty and shamefaced, but paciﬁed, went back to his hotel. His
brother, Darya Alexandrovna, and Stepan Arkadyevitch, all in full dress, were
waiting for him to bless him with the holy picture. ere was no time to lose.
Darya Alexandrovna had to drive home again to fetch her curled and pomaded
son, who was to carry the holy pictures aer the bride. en a carriage had to
be sent for the best man, and another that would take Sergey Ivanovitch away
would have to be sent back…. Altogether there were a great many most compli-

cdiii
cated maers to be considered and arranged. One thing was unmistakable, that
there must be no delay, as it was already half-past six.
Nothing special happened at the ceremony of benediction with the holy
picture. Stepan Arkadyevitch stood in a comically solemn pose beside his wife,
took the holy picture, and telling Levin to bow down to the ground, he blessed him
with his kindly, ironical smile, and kissed him three times; Darya Alexandrovna
did the same, and immediately was in a hurry to get oﬀ, and again plunged into
the intricate question of the destinations of the various carriages.
"Come, I’ll tell you how we’ll manage: you drive in our carriage to fetch
him, and Sergey Ivanovitch, if he’ll be so good, will drive there and then send his
carriage."
"Of course; I shall be delighted."
"We’ll come on directly with him. Are your things sent o?" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch.
"Yes," answered Levin, and he told Kouzma to put out his clothes for him to
dress.

Chapter 
A crowd of people, principally women, was thronging round the church lighted up
for the wedding. ose who had not succeeded in geing into the main entrance
were crowding about the windows, pushing, wrangling, and peeping through the
gratings.
More than twenty carriages had already been drawn up in ranks along the
street by the police. A police oﬃcer, regardless of the frost, stood at the entrance,
gorgeous in his uniform. More carriages were continually driving up, and ladies
wearing ﬂowers and carrying their trains, and men taking oﬀ their helmets or
black hats kept walking into the church. Inside the church both lusters were already lighted, and all the candles before the holy pictures. e gilt on the red
ground of the holy picture-stand, and the gilt relief on the pictures, and the silver of the lusters and candlesticks, and the stones of the ﬂoor, and the rugs, and
the banners above in the choir, and the steps of the altar, and the old blackened
books, and the cassocks and surplices—all were ﬂooded with light. On the right
side of the warm church, in the crowd of frock coats and white ties, uniforms
and broadcloth, velvet, satin, hair and ﬂowers, bare shoulders and arms and long
gloves, there was discreet but lively conversation that echoed strangely in the
high cupola. Every time there was heard the creak of the opened door the conversation in the crowd died away, and everybody looked round expecting to see
the bride and bridegroom come in. But the door had opened more than ten times,

cdiv
and each time it was either a belated guest or guests, who joined the circle of the
invited on the right, or a spectator, who had eluded or soened the police oﬃcer, and went to join the crowd of outsiders on the le. Both the guests and the
outside public had by now passed through all the phases of anticipation.
At ﬁrst they imagined that the bride and bridegroom would arrive immediately, and aached no importance at all to their being late. en they began to
look more and more oen towards the door, and to talk of whether anything could
have happened. en the long delay began to be positively discomforting, and relations and guests tried to look as if they were not thinking of the bridegroom but
were engrossed in conversation.
e head deacon, as though to remind them of the value of his time, coughed
impatiently, making the window-panes quiver in their frames. In the choir the
bored choristers could be heard trying their voices and blowing their noses. e
priest was continually sending ﬁrst the beadle and then the deacon to ﬁnd out
whether the bridegroom had not come, more and more oen he went himself, in
a lilac vestment and an embroidered sash, to the side door, expecting to see the
bridegroom. At last one of the ladies, glancing at her watch, said, "It really is
strange, though!" and all the guests became uneasy and began loudly expressing
their wonder and dissatisfaction. One of the bridegroom’s best men went to ﬁnd
out what had happened. Kiy meanwhile had long ago been quite ready, and in
her white dress and long veil and wreath of orange blossoms she was standing in
the drawing-room of the Shtcherbatskys’ house with her sister, Madame Lvova,
who was her bridal-mother. She was looking out of the window, and had been
for over half an hour anxiously expecting to hear from the best man that her
bridegroom was at the church.
Levin meanwhile, in his trousers, but without his coat and waistcoat, was
walking to and fro in his room at the hotel, continually puing his head out of
the door and looking up and down the corridor. But in the corridor there was no
sign of the person he was looking for and he came back in despair, and frantically
waving his hands addressed Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was smoking serenely.
"Was ever a man in such a fearful fool’s position?" he said.
"Yes, it is stupid," Stepan Arkadyevitch assented, smiling soothingly. "But
don’t worry, it’ll be brought directly."
"No, what is to be done!" said Levin, with smothered fury. "And these fools
of open waistcoats! Out of the question!" he said, looking at the crumpled front
of his shirt. "And what if the things have been taken on to the railway station!"
he roared in desperation.
"en you must put on mine."
"I ought to have done so long ago, if at all."
"It’s not nice to look ridiculous…. Wait a bit! it will come round."

cdv
e point was that when Levin asked for his evening suit, Kouzma, his old
servant, had brought him the coat, waistcoat, and everything that was wanted.
"But the shirt!" cried Levin.
"You’ve got a shirt on," Kouzma answered, with a placid smile.
Kouzma had not thought of leaving out a clean shirt, and on receiving instructions to pack up everything and send it round to the Shtcherbatskys’ house,
from which the young people were to set out the same evening, he had done
so, packing everything but the dress suit. e shirt worn since the morning was
crumpled and out of the question with the fashionable open waistcoat. It was a
long way to send to the Shtcherbatskys’. ey sent out to buy a shirt. e servant
came back; everything was shut up—it was Sunday. ey sent to Stepan Arkadyevitch’s and brought a shirt—it was impossibly wide and short. ey sent ﬁnally
to the Shtcherbatskys’ to unpack the things. e bridegroom was expected at the
church while he was pacing up and down his room like a wild beast in a cage,
peeping out into the corridor, and with horror and despair recalling what absurd
things he had said to Kiy and what she might be thinking now.
At last the guilty Kouzma ﬂew panting into the room with the shirt.
"Only just in time. ey were just liing it into the van," said Kouzma.
ree minutes later Levin ran full speed into the corridor, not looking at his
watch for fear of aggravating his suﬀerings.
"You won’t help maers like this," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a smile,
hurrying with more deliberation aer him. "It will come round, it will come round
… I tell you."

Chapter 
"ey’ve come!" "Here he is!" "Which one?" "Rather young, eh?" "Why, my dear
soul, she looks more dead than alive!" were the comments in the crowd, when
Levin, meeting his bride in the entrance, walked with her into the church.
Stepan Arkadyevitch told his wife the cause of the delay, and the guests
were whispering it with smiles to one another. Levin saw nothing and no one; he
did not take his eyes oﬀ his bride.
Everyone said she had lost her looks dreadfully of late, and was not nearly
so prey on her wedding day as usual; but Levin did not think so. He looked at her
hair done up high, with the long white veil and white ﬂowers and the high, standup, scalloped collar, that in such a maidenly fashion hid her long neck at the sides
and only showed it in front, her strikingly slender ﬁgure, and it seemed to him
that she looked beer than ever—not because these ﬂowers, this veil, this gown
from Paris added anything to her beauty; but because, in spite of the elaborate

cdvi
sumptuousness of her aire, the expression of her sweet face, of her eyes, of her
lips was still her own characteristic expression of guileless truthfulness.
"I was beginning to think you meant to run away," she said, and smiled to
him.
"It’s so stupid, what happened to me, I’m ashamed to speak of it!" he said,
reddening, and he was obliged to turn to Sergey Ivanovitch, who came up to him.
"is is a prey story of yours about the shirt!" said Sergey Ivanovitch, shaking his head and smiling.
"Yes, yes!" answered Levin, without an idea of what they were talking about.
"Now, Kostya, you have to decide," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with an air
of mock dismay, "a weighty question. You are at this moment just in the humor
to appreciate all its gravity. ey ask me, are they to light the candles that have
been lighted before or candles that have never been lighted? It’s a maer of ten
roubles," he added, relaxing his lips into a smile. "I have decided, but I was afraid
you might not agree."
Levin saw it was a joke, but he could not smile.
"Well, how’s it to be then?—unlighted or lighted candles? that’s the question."
"Yes, yes, unlighted."
"Oh, I’m very glad. e question’s decided!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling. "How silly men are, though, in this position," he said to Tchirikov, when Levin,
aer looking absently at him, had moved back to his bride.
"Kiy, mind you’re the ﬁrst to step on the carpet," said Countess Nordston,
coming up. "You’re a nice person!" she said to Levin.
"Aren’t you frightened, eh?" said Marya Dmitrievna, an old aunt.
"Are you cold? You’re pale. Stop a minute, stoop down," said Kiy’s sister,
Madame Lvova, and with her plump, handsome arms she smilingly set straight
the ﬂowers on her head.
Dolly came up, tried to say something, but could not speak, cried, and then
laughed unnaturally.
Kiy looked at all of them with the same absent eyes as Levin.
Meanwhile the oﬃciating clergy had got into their vestments, and the priest
and deacon came out to the lectern, which stood in the forepart of the church. e
priest turned to Levin saying something. Levin did not hear what the priest said.
"Take the bride’s hand and lead her up," the best man said to Levin.
It was a long while before Levin could make out what was expected of him.
For a long time they tried to set him right and made him begin again—because he
kept taking Kiy by the wrong arm or with the wrong arm—till he understood at
last that what he had to do was, without changing his position, to take her right
hand in his right hand. When at last he had taken the bride’s hand in the correct

cdvii
way, the priest walked a few paces in front of them and stopped at the lectern. e
crowd of friends and relations moved aer them, with a buzz of talk and a rustle
of skirts. Someone stooped down and pulled out the bride’s train. e church
became so still that the drops of wax could be heard falling from the candles.
e lile old priest in his ecclesiastical cap, with his long silvery-gray locks
of hair parted behind his ears, was fumbling with something at the lectern, puing
out his lile old hands from under the heavy silver vestment with the gold cross
on the back of it.
Stepan Arkadyevitch approached him cautiously, whispered something, and
making a sign to Levin, walked back again.
e priest lighted two candles, wreathed with ﬂowers, and holding them
sideways so that the wax dropped slowly from them he turned, facing the bridal
pair. e priest was the same old man that had confessed Levin. He looked with
weary and melancholy eyes at the bride and bridegroom, sighed, and puing his
right hand out from his vestment, blessed the bridegroom with it, and also with a
shade of solicitous tenderness laid the crossed ﬁngers on the bowed head of Kiy.
en he gave them the candles, and taking the censer, moved slowly away from
them.
"Can it be true?" thought Levin, and he looked round at his bride. Looking
down at her he saw her face in proﬁle, and from the scarcely perceptible quiver
of her lips and eyelashes he knew she was aware of his eyes upon her. She did not
look round, but the high scalloped collar, that reached her lile pink ear, trembled
faintly. He saw that a sigh was held back in her throat, and the lile hand in the
long glove shook as it held the candle.
All the fuss of the shirt, of being late, all the talk of friends and relations,
their annoyance, his ludicrous position—all suddenly passed away and he was
ﬁlled with joy and dread.
e handsome, stately head-deacon wearing a silver robe and his curly locks
standing out at each side of his head, stepped smartly forward, and liing his stole
on two ﬁngers, stood opposite the priest.
"Blessed be the name of the Lord," the solemn syllables rang out slowly one
aer another, seing the air quivering with waves of sound.
"Blessed is the name of our God, from the beginning, is now, and ever shall
be," the lile old priest answered in a submissive, piping voice, still ﬁngering
something at the lectern. And the full chorus of the unseen choir rose up, ﬁlling the whole church, from the windows to the vaulted roof, with broad waves of
melody. It grew stronger, rested for an instant, and slowly died away.
ey prayed, as they always do, for peace from on high and for salvation,
for the Holy Synod, and for the Tsar; they prayed, too, for the servants of God,
Konstantin and Ekaterina, now plighting their troth.

cdviii
"Vouchsafe to them love made perfect, peace and help, O Lord, we beseech
ee," the whole church seemed to breathe with the voice of the head deacon.
Levin heard the words, and they impressed him. "How did they guess that
it is help, just help that one wants?" he thought, recalling all his fears and doubts
of late. "What do I know? what can I do in this fearful business," he thought,
"without help? Yes, it is help I want now."
When the deacon had ﬁnished the prayer for the Imperial family, the priest
turned to the bridal pair with a book: "Eternal God, that joinest together in love
them that were separate," he read in a gentle, piping voice: "who hast ordained
the union of holy wedlock that cannot be set asunder, ou who didst bless Isaac
and Rebecca and their descendants, according to y Holy Covenant; bless y
servants, Konstantin and Ekaterina, leading them in the path of all good works.
For gracious and merciful art ou, our Lord, and glory be to ee, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, now and ever shall be."
"Amen!" the unseen choir sent rolling again upon the air.
"‘Joinest together in love them that were separate.’ What deep meaning
in those words, and how they correspond with what one feels at this moment,"
thought Levin. "Is she feeling the same as I?"
And looking round, he met her eyes, and from their expression he concluded
that she was understanding it just as he was. But this was a mistake; she almost
completely missed the meaning of the words of the service; she had not heard
them, in fact. She could not listen to them and take them in, so strong was the one
feeling that ﬁlled her breast and grew stronger and stronger. at feeling was joy
at the completion of the process that for the last month and a half had been going
on in her soul, and had during those six weeks been a joy and a torture to her. On
the day when in the drawing room of the house in Arbaty Street she had gone up
to him in her brown dress, and given herself to him without a word—on that day,
at that hour, there took place in her heart a complete severance from all her old
life, and a quite diﬀerent, new, uerly strange life had begun for her, while the old
life was actually going on as before. ose six weeks had for her been a time of the
utmost bliss and the utmost misery. All her life, all her desires and hopes were
concentrated on this one man, still uncomprehended by her, to whom she was
bound by a feeling of alternate araction and repulsion, even less comprehended
than the man himself, and all the while she was going on living in the outward
conditions of her old life. Living the old life, she was horriﬁed at herself, at her
uer insurmountable callousness to all her own past, to things, to habits, to the
people she had loved, who loved her—to her mother, who was wounded by her
indiﬀerence, to her kind, tender father, till then dearer than all the world. At one
moment she was horriﬁed at this indiﬀerence, at another she rejoiced at what
had brought her to this indiﬀerence. She could not frame a thought, not a wish

cdix
apart from life with this man; but this new life was not yet, and she could not
even picture it clearly to herself. ere was only anticipation, the dread and joy
of the new and the unknown. And now behold—anticipation and uncertainty and
remorse at the abandonment of the old life—all was ending, and the new was
beginning. is new life could not but have terrors for her inexperience; but,
terrible or not, the change had been wrought six weeks before in her soul, and
this was merely the ﬁnal sanction of what had long been completed in her heart.
Turning again to the lectern, the priest with some diﬃculty took Kiy’s
lile ring, and asking Levin for his hand, put it on the ﬁrst joint of his ﬁnger. "e
servant of God, Konstantin, plights his troth to the servant of God, Ekaterina."
And puing his big ring on Kiy’s touchingly weak, pink lile ﬁnger, the priest
said the same thing.
And the bridal pair tried several times to understand what they had to do,
and each time made some mistake and were corrected by the priest in a whisper.
At last, having duly performed the ceremony, having signed the rings with the
cross, the priest handed Kiy the big ring, and Levin the lile one. Again they
were puzzled, and passed the rings from hand to hand, still without doing what
was expected.
Dolly, Tchirikov, and Stepan Arkadyevitch stepped forward to set them
right. ere was an interval of hesitation, whispering, and smiles; but the expression of solemn emotion on the faces of the betrothed pair did not change:
on the contrary, in their perplexity over their hands they looked more grave and
deeply moved than before, and the smile with which Stepan Arkadyevitch whispered to them that now they would each put on their own ring died away on his
lips. He had a feeling that any smile would jar on them.
"ou who didst from the beginning create male and female," the priest read
aer the exchange of rings, "from ee woman was given to man to be a helpmeet to him, and for the procreation of children. O Lord, our God, who hast
poured down the blessings of y Truth according to y Holy Covenant upon
y chosen servants, our fathers, from generation to generation, bless y servants Konstantin and Ekaterina, and make their troth fast in faith, and union of
hearts, and truth, and love…."
Levin felt more and more that all his ideas of marriage, all his dreams of
how he would order his life, were mere childishness, and that it was something
he had not understood hitherto, and now understood less than ever, though it was
being performed upon him. e lump in his throat rose higher and higher, tears
that would not be checked came into his eyes.

Chapter 

cdx
In the church there was all Moscow, all the friends and relations; and during the
ceremony of plighting troth, in the brilliantly lighted church, there was an incessant ﬂow of discreetly subdued talk in the circle of gaily dressed women and girls,
and men in white ties, frockcoats, and uniforms. e talk was principally kept
up by the men, while the women were absorbed in watching every detail of the
ceremony, which always means so much to them.
In the lile group nearest to the bride were her two sisters: Dolly, and the
other one, the self-possessed beauty, Madame Lvova, who had just arrived from
abroad.
"Why is it Marie’s in lilac, as bad as black, at a wedding?" said Madame
Korsunskaya.
"With her complexion, it’s the one salvation," responded Madame Trubetskaya. "I wonder why they had the wedding in the evening? It’s like shoppeople…"
"So much preier. I was married in the evening too…" answered Madame
Korsunskaya, and she sighed, remembering how charming she had been that day,
and how absurdly in love her husband was, and how diﬀerent it all was now.
"ey say if anyone’s best man more than ten times, he’ll never be married.
I wanted to be for the tenth time, but the post was taken," said Count Siniavin to
the prey Princess Tcharskaya, who had designs on him.
Princess Tcharskaya only answered with a smile. She looked at Kiy, thinking how and when she would stand with Count Siniavin in Kiy’s place, and how
she would remind him then of his joke today.
Shtcherbatsky told the old maid of honor, Madame Nikolaeva, that he meant
to put the crown on Kiy’s chignon for luck.
"She ought not to have worn a chignon," answered Madame Nikolaeva, who
had long ago made up her mind that if the elderly widower she was angling for
married her, the wedding should be of the simplest. "I don’t like such grandeur."
Sergey Ivanovitch was talking to Darya Dmitrievna, jestingly assuring her
that the custom of going away aer the wedding was becoming common because
newly married people always felt a lile ashamed of themselves.
"Your brother may feel proud of himself. She’s a marvel of sweetness. I
believe you’re envious."
"Oh, I’ve got over that, Darya Dmitrievna," he answered, and a melancholy
and serious expression suddenly came over his face.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was telling his sister-in-law his joke about divorce.
"e wreath wants seing straight," she answered, not hearing him.
"What a pity she’s lost her looks so," Countess Nordston said to Madame
Lvova. "Still he’s not worth her lile ﬁnger, is he?"
"Oh, I like him so—not because he’s my future beau-frère," answered Madame

cdxi
Lvova. "And how well he’s behaving! It’s so diﬃcult, too, to look well in such a
position, not to be ridiculous. And he’s not ridiculous, and not aﬀected; one can
see he’s moved."
"You expected it, I suppose?"
"Almost. She always cared for him."
"Well, we shall see which of them will step on the rug ﬁrst. I warned Kiy."
"It will make no diﬀerence," said Madame Lvova; "we’re all obedient wives;
it’s in our family."
"Oh, I stepped on the rug before Vassily on purpose. And you, Dolly?"
Dolly stood beside them; she heard them, but she did not answer. She was
deeply moved. e tears stood in her eyes, and she could not have spoken without crying. She was rejoicing over Kiy and Levin; going back in thought to her
own wedding, she glanced at the radiant ﬁgure of Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgot all
the present, and remembered only her own innocent love. She recalled not herself only, but all her women-friends and acquaintances. She thought of them on
the one day of their triumph, when they had stood like Kiy under the wedding
crown, with love and hope and dread in their hearts, renouncing the past, and
stepping forward into the mysterious future. Among the brides that came back
to her memory, she thought too of her darling Anna, of whose proposed divorce
she had just been hearing. And she had stood just as innocent in orange ﬂowers and bridal veil. And now? "It’s terribly strange," she said to herself. It was
not merely the sisters, the women-friends and female relations of the bride who
were following every detail of the ceremony. Women who were quite strangers,
mere spectators, were watching it excitedly, holding their breath, in fear of losing
a single movement or expression of the bride and bridegroom, and angrily not
answering, oen not hearing, the remarks of the callous men, who kept making
joking or irrelevant observations.
"Why has she been crying? Is she being married against her will?"
"Against her will to a ﬁne fellow like that? A prince, isn’t he?"
"Is that her sister in the white satin? Just listen how the deacon booms out,
‘And fearing her husband.’"
"Are the choristers from Tchudovo?"
"No, from the Synod."
"I asked the footman. He says he’s going to take her home to his country
place at once. Awfully rich, they say. at’s why she’s being married to him."
"No, they’re a well-matched pair."
"I say, Marya Vassilievna, you were making out those ﬂy-away crinolines
were not being worn. Just look at her in the puce dress—an ambassador’s wife
they say she is—how her skirt bounces out from side to side!"
"What a prey dear the bride is—like a lamb decked with ﬂowers! Well, say

cdxii
what you will, we women feel for our sister."
Such were the comments in the crowd of gazing women who had succeeded
in slipping in at the church doors.

Chapter 
When the ceremony of plighting troth was over, the beadle spread before the
lectern in the middle of the church a piece of pink silken stuﬀ, the choir sang a
complicated and elaborate psalm, in which the bass and tenor sang responses to
one another, and the priest turning round pointed the bridal pair to the pink silk
rug. ough both had oen heard a great deal about the saying that the one who
steps ﬁrst on the rug will be the head of the house, neither Levin nor Kiy were
capable of recollecting it, as they took the few steps towards it. ey did not hear
the loud remarks and disputes that followed, some maintaining he had stepped
on ﬁrst, and others that both had stepped on together.
Aer the customary questions, whether they desired to enter upon matrimony, and whether they were pledged to anyone else, and their answers, which
sounded strange to themselves, a new ceremony began. Kiy listened to the
words of the prayer, trying to make out their meaning, but she could not. e
feeling of triumph and radiant happiness ﬂooded her soul more and more as the
ceremony went on, and deprived her of all power of aention.
ey prayed: "Endow them with continence and fruitfulness, and vouchsafe that their hearts may rejoice looking upon their sons and daughters." ey
alluded to God’s creation of a wife from Adam’s rib "and for this cause a man
shall leave father and mother, and cleave unto his wife, and they two shall be one
ﬂesh," and that "this is a great mystery"; they prayed that God would make them
fruitful and bless them, like Isaac and Rebecca, Joseph, Moses and Zipporah, and
that they might look upon their children’s children. "at’s all splendid," thought
Kiy, catching the words, "all that’s just as it should be," and a smile of happiness,
unconsciously reﬂected in everyone who looked at her, beamed on her radiant
face.
"Put it on quite," voices were heard urging when the priest had put on the
wedding crowns and Shtcherbatsky, his hand shaking in its three-buon glove,
held the crown high above her head.
"Put it on!" she whispered, smiling.
Levin looked round at her, and was struck by the joyful radiance on her face,
and unconsciously her feeling infected him. He too, like her felt glad and happy.
ey enjoyed hearing the epistle read, and the roll of the head deacon’s
voice at the last verse, awaited with such impatience by the outside public. ey

cdxiii
enjoyed drinking out of the shallow cup of warm red wine and water, and they
were still more pleased when the priest, ﬂinging back his stole and taking both
their hands in his, led them round the lectern to the accompaniment of bass voices
chanting "Glory to God."
Shtcherbatsky and Tchirikov, supporting the crowns and stumbling over
the bride’s train, smiling too and seeming delighted at something, were at one
moment le behind, at the next treading on the bridal pair as the priest came to
a halt. e spark of joy kindled in Kiy seemed to have infected everyone in the
church. It seemed to Levin that the priest and the deacon too wanted to smile just
as he did.
Taking the crowns oﬀ their heads the priest read the last prayer and congratulated the young people. Levin looked at Kiy, and he had never before seen
her look as she did. She was charming with the new radiance of happiness in her
face. Levin longed to say something to her, but he did not know whether it was
all over. e priest got him out of his diﬃculty. He smiled his kindly smile and
said gently, "Kiss your wife, and you kiss your husband," and took the candles out
of their hands.
Levin kissed her smiling lips with timid care, gave her his arm, and with a
new strange sense of closeness, walked out of the church. He did not believe, he
could not believe, that it was true. It was only when their wondering and timid
eyes met that he believed in it, because he felt that they were one.
Aer supper, the same night, the young people le for the country.

Chapter 
Vronsky and Anna had been traveling for three months together in Europe. ey
had visited Venice, Rome, and Naples, and had just arrived at a small Italian town
where they meant to stay some time. A handsome head waiter, with thick pomaded hair parted from the neck upwards, an evening coat, a broad white cambric shirt front, and a bunch of trinkets hanging above his rounded stomach, stood
with his hands in the full curve of his pockets, looking contemptuously from under his eyelids while he gave some frigid reply to a gentleman who had stopped
him. Catching the sound of footsteps coming from the other side of the entry towards the staircase, the head waiter turned round, and seeing the Russian count,
who had taken their best rooms, he took his hands out of his pockets deferentially,
and with a bow informed him that a courier had been, and that the business about
the palazzo had been arranged. e steward was prepared to sign the agreement.
"Ah! I’m glad to hear it," said Vronsky. "Is madame at home or not?"
"Madame has been out for a walk but has returned now," answered the

cdxiv
waiter.
Vronsky took oﬀ his so, wide-brimmed hat and passed his handkerchief
over his heated brow and hair, which had grown half over his ears, and was
brushed back covering the bald patch on his head. And glancing casually at the
gentleman, who still stood there gazing intently at him, he would have gone on.
"is gentleman is a Russian, and was inquiring aer you," said the head
waiter.
With mingled feelings of annoyance at never being able to get away from
acquaintances anywhere, and longing to ﬁnd some sort of diversion from the
monotony of his life, Vronsky looked once more at the gentleman, who had retreated and stood still again, and at the same moment a light came into the eyes
of both.
"Golenishtchev!"
"Vronsky!"
It really was Golenishtchev, a comrade of Vronsky’s in the Corps of Pages.
In the corps Golenishtchev had belonged to the liberal party; he le the corps
without entering the army, and had never taken oﬃce under the government.
Vronsky and he had gone completely diﬀerent ways on leaving the corps, and
had only met once since.
At that meeting Vronsky perceived that Golenishtchev had taken up a sort
of loy, intellectually liberal line, and was consequently disposed to look down
upon Vronsky’s interests and calling in life. Hence Vronsky had met him with
the chilling and haughty manner he so well knew how to assume, the meaning
of which was: "You may like or dislike my way of life, that’s a maer of the most
perfect indiﬀerence to me; you will have to treat me with respect if you want to
know me." Golenishtchev had been contemptuously indiﬀerent to the tone taken
by Vronsky. is second meeting might have been expected, one would have
supposed, to estrange them still more. But now they beamed and exclaimed with
delight on recognizing one another. Vronsky would never have expected to be so
pleased to see Golenishtchev, but probably he was not himself aware how bored
he was. He forgot the disagreeable impression of their last meeting, and with a
face of frank delight held out his hand to his old comrade. e same expression
of delight replaced the look of uneasiness on Golenishtchev’s face.
"How glad I am to meet you!" said Vronsky, showing his strong white teeth
in a friendly smile.
"I heard the name Vronsky, but I didn’t know which one. I’m very, very
glad!"
"Let’s go in. Come, tell me what you’re doing."
"I’ve been living here for two years. I’m working."
"Ah!" said Vronsky, with sympathy; "let’s go in." And with the habit common

cdxv
with Russians, instead of saying in Russian what he wanted to keep from the
servants, he began to speak in French.
"Do you know Madame Karenina? We are traveling together. I am going to
see her now," he said in French, carefully scrutinizing Golenishtchev’s face.
"Ah! I did not know" (though he did know), Golenishtchev answered carelessly. "Have you been here long?" he added.
"Four days," Vronsky answered, once more scrutinizing his friend’s face intently.
"Yes, he’s a decent fellow, and will look at the thing properly," Vronsky said
to himself, catching the signiﬁcance of Golenishtchev’s face and the change of
subject. "I can introduce him to Anna, he looks at it properly."
During those three months that Vronsky had spent abroad with Anna, he
had always on meeting new people asked himself how the new person would
look at his relations with Anna, and for the most part, in men, he had met with
the "proper" way of looking at it. But if he had been asked, and those who looked
at it "properly" had been asked, exactly how they did look at it, both he and they
would have been greatly puzzled to answer.
In reality, those who in Vronsky’s opinion had the "proper" view had no sort
of view at all, but behaved in general as well-bred persons do behave in regard
to all the complex and insoluble problems with which life is encompassed on all
sides; they behaved with propriety, avoiding allusions and unpleasant questions.
ey assumed an air of fully comprehending the import and force of the situation, of accepting and even approving of it, but of considering it superﬂuous and
uncalled for to put all this into words.
Vronsky at once divined that Golenishtchev was of this class, and therefore
was doubly pleased to see him. And in fact, Golenishtchev’s manner to Madame
Karenina, when he was taken to call on her, was all that Vronsky could have
desired. Obviously without the slightest eﬀort he steered clear of all subjects
which might lead to embarrassment.
He had never met Anna before, and was struck by her beauty, and still more
by the frankness with which she accepted her position. She blushed when Vronsky brought in Golenishtchev, and he was extremely charmed by this childish
blush overspreading her candid and handsome face. But what he liked particularly was the way in which at once, as though on purpose that there might be
no misunderstanding with an outsider, she called Vronsky simply Alexey, and
said they were moving into a house they had just taken, what was here called a
palazzo. Golenishtchev liked this direct and simple aitude to her own position.
Looking at Anna’s manner of simple-hearted, spirited gaiety, and knowing Alexey
Alexandrovitch and Vronsky, Golenishtchev fancied that he understood her perfectly. He fancied that he understood what she was uerly unable to understand:

cdxvi
how it was that, having made her husband wretched, having abandoned him and
her son and lost her good name, she yet felt full of spirits, gaiety, and happiness.
"It’s in the guide-book," said Golenishtchev, referring to the palazzo Vronsky
had taken. "ere’s a ﬁrst-rate Tintoreo there. One of his latest period."
"I tell you what: it’s a lovely day, let’s go and have another look at it," said
Vronsky, addressing Anna.
"I shall be very glad to; I’ll go and put on my hat. Would you say it’s hot?"
she said, stopping short in the doorway and looking inquiringly at Vronsky. And
again a vivid ﬂush overspread her face.
Vronsky saw from her eyes that she did not know on what terms he cared
to be with Golenishtchev, and so was afraid of not behaving as he would wish.
He looked a long, tender look at her.
"No, not very," he said.
And it seemed to her that she understood everything, most of all, that he
was pleased with her; and smiling to him, she walked with her rapid step out at
the door.
e friends glanced at one another, and a look of hesitation came into both
faces, as though Golenishtchev, unmistakably admiring her, would have liked to
say something about her, and could not ﬁnd the right thing to say, while Vronsky
desired and dreaded his doing so.
"Well then," Vronsky began to start a conversation of some sort; "so you’re
seled here? You’re still at the same work, then?" he went on, recalling that he
had been told Golenishtchev was writing something.
"Yes, I’m writing the second part of the Two Elements," said Golenishtchev,
coloring with pleasure at the question—"that is, to be exact, I am not writing it
yet; I am preparing, collecting materials. It will be of far wider scope, and will
touch on almost all questions. We in Russia refuse to see that we are the heirs of
Byzantium," and he launched into a long and heated explanation of his views.
Vronsky at the ﬁrst moment felt embarrassed at not even knowing of the
ﬁrst part of the Two Elements, of which the author spoke as something well known.
But as Golenishtchev began to lay down his opinions and Vronsky was able to follow them even without knowing the Two Elements, he listened to him with some
interest, for Golenishtchev spoke well. But Vronsky was startled and annoyed by
the nervous irascibility with which Golenishtchev talked of the subject that engrossed him. As he went on talking, his eyes gliered more and more angrily; he
was more and more hurried in his replies to imaginary opponents, and his face
grew more and more excited and worried. Remembering Golenishtchev, a thin,
lively, good-natured and well-bred boy, always at the head of the class, Vronsky
could not make out the reason of his irritability, and he did not like it. What
he particularly disliked was that Golenishtchev, a man belonging to a good set,

cdxvii
should put himself on a level with some scribbling fellows, with whom he was
irritated and angry. Was it worth it? Vronsky disliked it, yet he felt that Golenishtchev was unhappy, and was sorry for him. Unhappiness, almost mental derangement, was visible on his mobile, rather handsome face, while without even
noticing Anna’s coming in, he went on hurriedly and hotly expressing his views.
When Anna came in in her hat and cape, and her lovely hand rapidly swinging her parasol, and stood beside him, it was with a feeling of relief that Vronsky
broke away from the plaintive eyes of Golenishtchev which fastened persistently
upon him, and with a fresh rush of love looked at his charming companion, full
of life and happiness. Golenishtchev recovered himself with an eﬀort, and at ﬁrst
was dejected and gloomy, but Anna, disposed to feel friendly with everyone as
she was at that time, soon revived his spirits by her direct and lively manner. After trying various subjects of conversation, she got him upon painting, of which
he talked very well, and she listened to him aentively. ey walked to the house
they had taken, and looked over it.
"I am very glad of one thing," said Anna to Golenishtchev when they were
on their way back, "Alexey will have a capital atelier. You must certainly take
that room," she said to Vronsky in Russian, using the aﬀectionately familiar form
as though she saw that Golenishtchev would become intimate with them in their
isolation, and that there was no need of reserve before him.
"Do you paint?" said Golenishtchev, turning round quickly to Vronsky.
"Yes, I used to study long ago, and now I have begun to do a lile," said
Vronsky, reddening.
"He has great talent," said Anna with a delighted smile. "I’m no judge, of
course. But good judges have said the same."

Chapter 
Anna, in that ﬁrst period of her emancipation and rapid return to health, felt herself unpardonably happy and full of the joy of life. e thought of her husband’s
unhappiness did not poison her happiness. On one side that memory was too
awful to be thought of. On the other side her husband’s unhappiness had given
her too much happiness to be regreed. e memory of all that had happened
aer her illness: her reconciliation with her husband, its breakdown, the news of
Vronsky’s wound, his visit, the preparations for divorce, the departure from her
husband’s house, the parting from her son—all that seemed to her like a delirious
dream, from which she had waked up alone with Vronsky abroad. e thought of
the harm caused to her husband aroused in her a feeling like repulsion, and akin
to what a drowning man might feel who has shaken oﬀ another man clinging to

cdxviii
him. at man did drown. It was an evil action, of course, but it was the sole
means of escape, and beer not to brood over these fearful facts.
One consolatory reﬂection upon her conduct had occurred to her at the
ﬁrst moment of the ﬁnal rupture, and when now she recalled all the past, she
remembered that one reﬂection. "I have inevitably made that man wretched," she
thought; "but I don’t want to proﬁt by his misery. I too am suﬀering, and shall
suﬀer; I am losing what I prized above everything—I am losing my good name
and my son. I have done wrong, and so I don’t want happiness, I don’t want a
divorce, and shall suﬀer from my shame and the separation from my child." But,
however sincerely Anna had meant to suﬀer, she was not suﬀering. Shame there
was not. With the tact of which both had such a large share, they had succeeded
in avoiding Russian ladies abroad, and so had never placed themselves in a false
position, and everywhere they had met people who pretended that they perfectly
understood their position, far beer indeed than they did themselves. Separation
from the son she loved—even that did not cause her anguish in these early days.
e baby girl—his child—was so sweet, and had so won Anna’s heart, since she
was all that was le her, that Anna rarely thought of her son.
e desire for life, waxing stronger with recovered health, was so intense,
and the conditions of life were so new and pleasant, that Anna felt unpardonably
happy. e more she got to know Vronsky, the more she loved him. She loved
him for himself, and for his love for her. Her complete ownership of him was a
continual joy to her. His presence was always sweet to her. All the traits of his
character, which she learned to know beer and beer, were unuerably dear to
her. His appearance, changed by his civilian dress, was as fascinating to her as
though she were some young girl in love. In everything he said, thought, and
did, she saw something particularly noble and elevated. Her adoration of him
alarmed her indeed; she sought and could not ﬁnd in him anything not ﬁne. She
dared not show him her sense of her own insigniﬁcance beside him. It seemed
to her that, knowing this, he might sooner cease to love her; and she dreaded
nothing now so much as losing his love, though she had no grounds for fearing it.
But she could not help being grateful to him for his aitude to her, and showing
that she appreciated it. He, who had in her opinion such a marked aptitude for a
political career, in which he would have been certain to play a leading part—he
had sacriﬁced his ambition for her sake, and never betrayed the slightest regret.
He was more lovingly respectful to her than ever, and the constant care that she
should not feel the awkwardness of her position never deserted him for a single
instant. He, so manly a man, never opposed her, had indeed, with her, no will of
his own, and was anxious, it seemed, for nothing but to anticipate her wishes. And
she could not but appreciate this, even though the very intensity of his solicitude
for her, the atmosphere of care with which he surrounded her, sometimes weighed

cdxix
upon her.
Vronsky, meanwhile, in spite of the complete realization of what he had
so long desired, was not perfectly happy. He soon felt that the realization of his
desires gave him no more than a grain of sand out of the mountain of happiness
he had expected. It showed him the mistake men make in picturing to themselves
happiness as the realization of their desires. For a time aer joining his life to hers,
and puing on civilian dress, he had felt all the delight of freedom in general of
which he had known nothing before, and of freedom in his love,—and he was
content, but not for long. He was soon aware that there was springing up in his
heart a desire for desires—ennui. Without conscious intention he began to clutch
at every passing caprice, taking it for a desire and an object. Sixteen hours of the
day must be occupied in some way, since they were living abroad in complete
freedom, outside the conditions of social life which ﬁlled up time in Petersburg.
As for the amusements of bachelor existence, which had provided Vronsky with
entertainment on previous tours abroad, they could not be thought of, since the
sole aempt of the sort had led to a sudden aack of depression in Anna, quite out
of proportion with the cause—a late supper with bachelor friends. Relations with
the society of the place—foreign and Russian—were equally out of the question
owing to the irregularity of their position. e inspection of objects of interest,
apart from the fact that everything had been seen already, had not for Vronsky,
a Russian and a sensible man, the immense signiﬁcance Englishmen are able to
aach to that pursuit.
And just as the hungry stomach eagerly accepts every object it can get,
hoping to ﬁnd nourishment in it, Vronsky quite unconsciously clutched ﬁrst at
politics, then at new books, and then at pictures.
As he had from a child a taste for painting, and as, not knowing what to
spend his money on, he had begun collecting engravings, he came to a stop at
painting, began to take interest in it, and concentrated upon it the unoccupied
mass of desires which demanded satisfaction.
He had a ready appreciation of art, and probably, with a taste for imitating
art, he supposed himself to have the real thing essential for an artist, and aer
hesitating for some time which style of painting to select—religious, historical,
realistic, or genre painting—he set to work to paint. He appreciated all kinds, and
could have felt inspired by any one of them; but he had no conception of the possibility of knowing nothing at all of any school of painting, and of being inspired
directly by what is within the soul, without caring whether what is painted will
belong to any recognized school. Since he knew nothing of this, and drew his
inspiration, not directly from life, but indirectly from life embodied in art, his inspiration came very quickly and easily, and as quickly and easily came his success
in painting something very similar to the sort of painting he was trying to imitate.

cdxx
More than any other style he liked the French—graceful and eﬀective—and
in that style he began to paint Anna’s portrait in Italian costume, and the portrait
seemed to him, and to everyone who saw it, extremely successful.

Chapter 
e old neglected palazzo, with its loy carved ceilings and frescoes on the walls,
with its ﬂoors of mosaic, with its heavy yellow stuﬀ curtains on the windows,
with its vases on pedestals, and its open ﬁreplaces, its carved doors and gloomy
reception rooms, hung with pictures—this palazzo did much, by its very appearance aer they had moved into it, to conﬁrm in Vronsky the agreeable illusion
that he was not so much a Russian country gentleman, a retired army oﬃcer, as
an enlightened amateur and patron of the arts, himself a modest artist who had
renounced the world, his connections, and his ambition for the sake of the woman
he loved.
e pose chosen by Vronsky with their removal into the palazzo was completely successful, and having, through Golenishtchev, made acquaintance with
a few interesting people, for a time he was satisﬁed. He painted studies from nature under the guidance of an Italian professor of painting, and studied mediaeval
Italian life. Mediaeval Italian life so fascinated Vronsky that he even wore a hat
and ﬂung a cloak over his shoulder in the mediaeval style, which, indeed, was
extremely becoming to him.
"Here we live, and know nothing of what’s going on," Vronsky said to Golenishtchev as he came to see him one morning. "Have you seen Mihailov’s picture?"
he said, handing him a Russian gazee he had received that morning, and pointing
to an article on a Russian artist, living in the very same town, and just ﬁnishing a
picture which had long been talked about, and had been bought beforehand. e
article reproached the government and the academy for leing so remarkable an
artist be le without encouragement and support.
"I’ve seen it," answered Golenishtchev. "Of course, he’s not without talent,
but it’s all in a wrong direction. It’s all the Ivanov-Strauss-Renan aitude to Christ
and to religious painting."
"What is the subject of the picture?" asked Anna.
"Christ before Pilate. Christ is represented as a Jew with all the realism of
the new school."
And the question of the subject of the picture having brought him to one of
his favorite theories, Golenishtchev launched forth into a disquisition on it.
"I can’t understand how they can fall into such a gross mistake. Christ always has His deﬁnite embodiment in the art of the great masters. And therefore,

cdxxi
if they want to depict, not God, but a revolutionist or a sage, let them take from
history a Socrates, a Franklin, a Charloe Corday, but not Christ. ey take the
very ﬁgure which cannot be taken for their art, and then…"
"And is it true that this Mihailov is in such poverty?" asked Vronsky, thinking that, as a Russian Maecenas, it was his duty to assist the artist regardless of
whether the picture were good or bad.
"I should say not. He’s a remarkable portrait-painter. Have you ever seen his
portrait of Madame Vassiltchikova? But I believe he doesn’t care about painting
any more portraits, and so very likely he is in want. I maintain that…"
"Couldn’t we ask him to paint a portrait of Anna Arkadyevna?" said Vronsky.
"Why mine?" said Anna. "Aer yours I don’t want another portrait. Beer
have one of Annie" (so she called her baby girl). "Here she is," she added, looking
out of the window at the handsome Italian nurse, who was carrying the child out
into the garden, and immediately glancing unnoticed at Vronsky. e handsome
nurse, from whom Vronsky was painting a head for his picture, was the one hidden grief in Anna’s life. He painted with her as his model, admired her beauty
and mediaevalism, and Anna dared not confess to herself that she was afraid of
becoming jealous of this nurse, and was for that reason particularly gracious and
condescending both to her and her lile son. Vronsky, too, glanced out of the
window and into Anna’s eyes, and, turning at once to Golenishtchev, he said:
"Do you know this Mihailov?"
"I have met him. But he’s a queer ﬁsh, and quite without breeding. You
know, one of those uncouth new people one’s so oen coming across nowadays,
one of those free-thinkers you know, who are reared d’emblée in theories of atheism, scepticism, and materialism. In former days," said Golenishtchev, not observing, or not willing to observe, that both Anna and Vronsky wanted to speak,
"in former days the free-thinker was a man who had been brought up in ideas of
religion, law, and morality, and only through conﬂict and struggle came to freethought; but now there has sprung up a new type of born free-thinkers who grow
up without even having heard of principles of morality or of religion, of the existence of authorities, who grow up directly in ideas of negation in everything,
that is to say, savages. Well, he’s of that class. He’s the son, it appears, of some
Moscow butler, and has never had any sort of bringing-up. When he got into the
academy and made his reputation he tried, as he’s no fool, to educate himself.
And he turned to what seemed to him the very source of culture—the magazines.
In old times, you see, a man who wanted to educate himself—a Frenchman, for
instance—would have set to work to study all the classics and theologians and
tragedians and historiaris and philosophers, and, you know, all the intellectual
work that came in his way. But in our day he goes straight for the literature

cdxxii
of negation, very quickly assimilates all the extracts of the science of negation,
and he’s ready. And that’s not all—twenty years ago he would have found in
that literature traces of conﬂict with authorities, with the creeds of the ages; he
would have perceived from this conﬂict that there was something else; but now
he comes at once upon a literature in which the old creeds do not even furnish
maer for discussion, but it is stated baldly that there is nothing else—evolution,
natural selection, struggle for existence—and that’s all. In my article I’ve…"
"I tell you what," said Anna, who had for a long while been exchanging
wary glances with Vronsky, and knew that he was not in the least interested in
the education of this artist, but was simply absorbed by the idea of assisting him,
and ordering a portrait of him; "I tell you what," she said, resolutely interrupting
Golenishtchev, who was still talking away, "let’s go and see him!"
Golenishtchev recovered his self-possession and readily agreed. But as the
artist lived in a remote suburb, it was decided to take the carriage.
An hour later Anna, with Golenishtchev by her side and Vronsky on the
front seat of the carriage, facing them, drove up to a new ugly house in the remote
suburb. On learning from the porter’s wife, who came out to them, that Mihailov
saw visitors at his studio, but that at that moment he was in his lodging only a
couple of steps oﬀ, they sent her to him with their cards, asking permission to see
his picture.

Chapter 
e artist Mihailov was, as always, at work when the cards of Count Vronsky and
Golenishtchev were brought to him. In the morning he had been working in his
studio at his big picture. On geing home he ﬂew into a rage with his wife for
not having managed to put oﬀ the landlady, who had been asking for money.
"I’ve said it to you twenty times, don’t enter into details. You’re fool enough
at all times, and when you start explaining things in Italian you’re a fool three
times as foolish," he said aer a long dispute.
"Don’t let it run so long; it’s not my fault. If I had the money…"
"Leave me in peace, for God’s sake!" Mihailov shrieked, with tears in his
voice, and, stopping his ears, he went oﬀ into his working room, the other side
of a partition wall, and closed the door aer him. "Idiotic woman!" he said to
himself, sat down to the table, and, opening a portfolio, he set to work at once
with peculiar fervor at a sketch he had begun.
Never did he work with such fervor and success as when things went ill
with him, and especially when he quarreled with his wife. "Oh! damn them all!"
he thought as he went on working. He was making a sketch for the ﬁgure of a

cdxxiii
man in a violent rage. A sketch had been made before, but he was dissatisﬁed
with it. "No, that one was beer … where is it?" He went back to his wife, and
scowling, and not looking at her, asked his eldest lile girl, where was that piece
of paper he had given them? e paper with the discarded sketch on it was found,
but it was dirty, and spoed with candle-grease. Still, he took the sketch, laid it
on his table, and, moving a lile away, screwing up his eyes, he fell to gazing at
it. All at once he smiled and gesticulated gleefully.
"at’s it! that’s it!" he said, and, at once picking up the pencil, he began
rapidly drawing. e spot of tallow had given the man a new pose.
He had sketched this new pose, when all at once he recalled the face of
a shopkeeper of whom he had bought cigars, a vigorous face with a prominent
chin, and he sketched this very face, this chin on to the ﬁgure of the man. He
laughed aloud with delight. e ﬁgure from a lifeless imagined thing had become
living, and such that it could never be changed. at ﬁgure lived, and was clearly
and unmistakably deﬁned. e sketch might be corrected in accordance with the
requirements of the ﬁgure, the legs, indeed, could and must be put diﬀerently, and
the position of the le hand must be quite altered; the hair too might be thrown
back. But in making these corrections he was not altering the ﬁgure but simply
geing rid of what concealed the ﬁgure. He was, as it were, stripping oﬀ the
wrappings which hindered it from being distinctly seen. Each new feature only
brought out the whole ﬁgure in all its force and vigor, as it had suddenly come to
him from the spot of tallow. He was carefully ﬁnishing the ﬁgure when the cards
were brought him.
"Coming, coming!"
He went in to his wife.
"Come, Sasha, don’t be cross!" he said, smiling timidly and aﬀectionately at
her. "You were to blame. I was to blame. I’ll make it all right." And having made
peace with his wife he put on an olive-green overcoat with a velvet collar and a
hat, and went towards his studio. e successful ﬁgure he had already forgoen.
Now he was delighted and excited at the visit of these people of consequence,
Russians, who had come in their carriage.
Of his picture, the one that stood now on his easel, he had at the boom
of his heart one conviction—that no one had ever painted a picture like it. He
did not believe that his picture was beer than all the pictures of Raphael, but
he knew that what he tried to convey in that picture, no one ever had conveyed.
is he knew positively, and had known a long while, ever since he had begun to
paint it. But other people’s criticisms, whatever they might be, had yet immense
consequence in his eyes, and they agitated him to the depths of his soul. Any
remark, the most insigniﬁcant, that showed that the critic saw even the tiniest part
of what he saw in the picture, agitated him to the depths of his soul. He always

cdxxiv
aributed to his critics a more profound comprehension than he had himself, and
always expected from them something he did not himself see in the picture. And
oen in their criticisms he fancied that he had found this.
He walked rapidly to the door of his studio, and in spite of his excitement
he was struck by the so light on Anna’s ﬁgure as she stood in the shade of the
entrance listening to Golenishtchev, who was eagerly telling her something, while
she evidently wanted to look round at the artist. He was himself unconscious
how, as he approached them, he seized on this impression and absorbed it, as
he had the chin of the shopkeeper who had sold him the cigars, and put it away
somewhere to be brought out when he wanted it. e visitors, not agreeably
impressed beforehand by Golenishtchev’s account of the artist, were still less so by
his personal appearance. ick-set and of middle height, with nimble movements,
with his brown hat, olive-green coat and narrow trousers—though wide trousers
had been a long while in fashion,—most of all, with the ordinariness of his broad
face, and the combined expression of timidity and anxiety to keep up his dignity,
Mihailov made an unpleasant impression.
"Please step in," he said, trying to look indiﬀerent, and going into the passage
he took a key out of his pocket and opened the door.

Chapter 
On entering the studio, Mihailov once more scanned his visitors and noted down
in his imagination Vronsky’s expression too, and especially his jaws. Although
his artistic sense was unceasingly at work collecting materials, although he felt
a continually increasing excitement as the moment of criticizing his work drew
nearer, he rapidly and subtly formed, from imperceptible signs, a mental image of
these three persons.
at fellow (Golenishtchev) was a Russian living here. Mihailov did not remember his surname nor where he had met him, nor what he had said to him.
He only remembered his face as he remembered all the faces he had ever seen;
but he remembered, too, that it was one of the faces laid by in his memory in the
immense class of the falsely consequential and poor in expression. e abundant
hair and very open forehead gave an appearance of consequence to the face, which
had only one expression—a pey, childish, peevish expression, concentrated just
above the bridge of the narrow nose. Vronsky and Madame Karenina must be,
Mihailov supposed, distinguished and wealthy Russians, knowing nothing about
art, like all those wealthy Russians, but posing as amateurs and connoisseurs.
"Most likely they’ve already looked at all the antiques, and now they’re making
the round of the studios of the new people, the German humbug, and the cracked

cdxxv
Pre-Raphaelite English fellow, and have only come to me to make the point of
view complete," he thought. He was well acquainted with the way dileanti have
(the cleverer they were the worse he found them) of looking at the works of contemporary artists with the sole object of being in a position to say that art is a
thing of the past, and that the more one sees of the new men the more one sees
how inimitable the works of the great old masters have remained. He expected all
this; he saw it all in their faces, he saw it in the careless indiﬀerence with which
they talked among themselves, stared at the lay ﬁgures and busts, and walked
about in leisurely fashion, waiting for him to uncover his picture. But in spite of
this, while he was turning over his studies, pulling up the blinds and taking oﬀ
the sheet, he was in intense excitement, especially as, in spite of his conviction
that all distinguished and wealthy Russians were certain to be beasts and fools,
he liked Vronsky, and still more Anna.
"Here, if you please," he said, moving on one side with his nimble gait and
pointing to his picture, "it’s the exhortation to Pilate. Mahew, chapter xxvii," he
said, feeling his lips were beginning to tremble with emotion. He moved away
and stood behind them.
For the few seconds during which the visitors were gazing at the picture in
silence Mihailov too gazed at it with the indiﬀerent eye of an outsider. For those
few seconds he was sure in anticipation that a higher, juster criticism would be
uered by them, by those very visitors whom he had been so despising a moment
before. He forgot all he had thought about his picture before during the three
years he had been painting it; he forgot all its qualities which had been absolutely
certain to him—he saw the picture with their indiﬀerent, new, outside eyes, and
saw nothing good in it. He saw in the foreground Pilate’s irritated face and the
serene face of Christ, and in the background the ﬁgures of Pilate’s retinue and
the face of John watching what was happening. Every face that, with such agony,
such blunders and corrections had grown up within him with its special character,
every face that had given him such torments and such raptures, and all these
faces so many times transposed for the sake of the harmony of the whole, all the
shades of color and tones that he had aained with such labor—all of this together
seemed to him now, looking at it with their eyes, the merest vulgarity, something
that had been done a thousand times over. e face dearest to him, the face of
Christ, the center of the picture, which had given him such ecstasy as it unfolded
itself to him, was uerly lost to him when he glanced at the picture with their
eyes. He saw a well-painted (no, not even that—he distinctly saw now a mass
of defects) repetition of those endless Christs of Titian, Raphael, Rubens, and the
same soldiers and Pilate. It was all common, poor, and stale, and positively badly
painted—weak and unequal. ey would be justiﬁed in repeating hypocritically
civil speeches in the presence of the painter, and pitying him and laughing at him

cdxxvi
when they were alone again.
e silence (though it lasted no more than a minute) became too intolerable
to him. To break it, and to show he was not agitated, he made an eﬀort and
addressed Golenishtchev.
"I think I’ve had the pleasure of meeting you," he said, looking uneasily ﬁrst
at Anna, then at Vronsky, in fear of losing any shade of their expression.
"To be sure! We met at Rossi’s, do you remember, at that soirée when that
Italian lady recited—the new Rachel?" Golenishtchev answered easily, removing
his eyes without the slightest regret from the picture and turning to the artist.
Noticing, however, that Mihailov was expecting a criticism of the picture,
he said:
"Your picture has got on a great deal since I saw it last time; and what strikes
me particularly now, as it did then, is the ﬁgure of Pilate. One so knows the man:
a good-natured, capital fellow, but an oﬃcial through and through, who does not
know what it is he’s doing. But I fancy…"
All Mihailov’s mobile face beamed at once; his eyes sparkled. He tried to say
something, but he could not speak for excitement, and pretended to be coughing.
Low as was his opinion of Golenishtchev’s capacity for understanding art, triﬂing
as was the true remark upon the ﬁdelity of the expression of Pilate as an oﬃcial,
and oﬀensive as might have seemed the uerance of so unimportant an observation while nothing was said of more serious points, Mihailov was in an ecstasy of
delight at this observation. He had himself thought about Pilate’s ﬁgure just what
Golenishtchev said. e fact that this reﬂection was but one of millions of reﬂections, which as Mihailov knew for certain would be true, did not diminish for him
the signiﬁcance of Golenishtchev’s remark. His heart warmed to Golenishtchev
for this remark, and from a state of depression he suddenly passed to ecstasy. At
once the whole of his picture lived before him in all the indescribable complexity
of everything living. Mihailov again tried to say that that was how he understood
Pilate, but his lips quivered intractably, and he could not pronounce the words.
Vronsky and Anna too said something in that subdued voice in which, partly to
avoid hurting the artist’s feelings and partly to avoid saying out loud something
silly—so easily said when talking of art—people usually speak at exhibitions of
pictures. Mihailov fancied that the picture had made an impression on them too.
He went up to them.
"How marvelous Christ’s expression is!" said Anna. Of all she saw she liked
that expression most of all, and she felt that it was the center of the picture, and so
praise of it would be pleasant to the artist. "One can see that He is pitying Pilate."
is again was one of the million true reﬂections that could be found in
his picture and in the ﬁgure of Christ. She said that He was pitying Pilate. In
Christ’s expression there ought to be indeed an expression of pity, since there is

cdxxvii
an expression of love, of heavenly peace, of readiness for death, and a sense of
the vanity of words. Of course there is the expression of an oﬃcial in Pilate and
of pity in Christ, seeing that one is the incarnation of the ﬂeshly and the other of
the spiritual life. All this and much more ﬂashed into Mihailov’s thoughts.
"Yes, and how that ﬁgure is done—what atmosphere! One can walk round
it," said Golenishtchev, unmistakably betraying by this remark that he did not
approve of the meaning and idea of the ﬁgure.
"Yes, there’s a wonderful mastery!" said Vronsky. "How those ﬁgures in
the background stand out! ere you have technique," he said, addressing Golenishtchev, alluding to a conversation between them about Vronsky’s despair of
aaining this technique.
"Yes, yes, marvelous!" Golenishtchev and Anna assented. In spite of the excited condition in which he was, the sentence about technique had sent a pang
to Mihailov’s heart, and looking angrily at Vronsky he suddenly scowled. He had
oen heard this word technique, and was uerly unable to understand what was
understood by it. He knew that by this term was understood a mechanical facility
for painting or drawing, entirely apart from its subject. He had noticed oen that
even in actual praise technique was opposed to essential quality, as though one
could paint well something that was bad. He knew that a great deal of aention
and care was necessary in taking oﬀ the coverings, to avoid injuring the creation
itself, and to take oﬀ all the coverings; but there was no art of painting—no technique of any sort—about it. If to a lile child or to his cook were revealed what
he saw, it or she would have been able to peel the wrappings oﬀ what was seen.
And the most experienced and adroit painter could not by mere mechanical facility paint anything if the lines of the subject were not revealed to him ﬁrst. Besides,
he saw that if it came to talking about technique, it was impossible to praise him
for it. In all he had painted and repainted he saw faults that hurt his eyes, coming
from want of care in taking oﬀ the wrappings—faults he could not correct now
without spoiling the whole. And in almost all the ﬁgures and faces he saw, too,
remnants of the wrappings not perfectly removed that spoiled the picture.
"One thing might be said, if you will allow me to make the remark…" observed Golenishtchev.
"Oh, I shall be delighted, I beg you," said Mihailov with a forced smile.
"at is, that you make Him the man-god, and not the God-man. But I know
that was what you meant to do."
"I cannot paint a Christ that is not in my heart," said Mihailov gloomily.
"Yes; but in that case, if you will allow me to say what I think…. Your picture
is so ﬁne that my observation cannot detract from it, and, besides, it is only my
personal opinion. With you it is diﬀerent. Your very motive is diﬀerent. But let us
take Ivanov. I imagine that if Christ is brought down to the level of an historical

cdxxviii
character, it would have been beer for Ivanov to select some other historical
subject, fresh, untouched."
"But if this is the greatest subject presented to art?"
"If one looked one would ﬁnd others. But the point is that art cannot suﬀer
doubt and discussion. And before the picture of Ivanov the question arises for the
believer and the unbeliever alike, ‘Is it God, or is it not God?’ and the unity of the
impression is destroyed."
"Why so? I think that for educated people," said Mihailov, "the question
cannot exist."
Golenishtchev did not agree with this, and confounded Mihailov by his support of his ﬁrst idea of the unity of the impression being essential to art.
Mihailov was greatly perturbed, but he could say nothing in defense of his
own idea.

Chapter 
Anna and Vronsky had long been exchanging glances, regreing their friend’s
ﬂow of cleverness. At last Vronsky, without waiting for the artist, walked away
to another small picture.
"Oh, how exquisite! What a lovely thing! A gem! How exquisite!" they
cried with one voice.
"What is it they’re so pleased with?" thought Mihailov. He had positively
forgoen that picture he had painted three years ago. He had forgoen all the
agonies and the ecstasies he had lived through with that picture when for several
months it had been the one thought haunting him day and night. He had forgotten, as he always forgot, the pictures he had ﬁnished. He did not even like to look
at it, and had only brought it out because he was expecting an Englishman who
wanted to buy it.
"Oh, that’s only an old study," he said.
"How ﬁne!" said Golenishtchev, he too, with unmistakable sincerity, falling
under the spell of the picture.
Two boys were angling in the shade of a willow-tree. e elder had just
dropped in the hook, and was carefully pulling the ﬂoat from behind a bush, entirely absorbed in what he was doing. e other, a lile younger, was lying in the
grass leaning on his elbows, with his tangled, ﬂaxen head in his hands, staring at
the water with his dreamy blue eyes. What was he thinking o?
e enthusiasm over this picture stirred some of the old feeling for it in
Mihailov, but he feared and disliked this waste of feeling for things past, and so,
even though this praise was grateful to him, he tried to draw his visitors away to

cdxxix
a third picture.
But Vronsky asked whether the picture was for sale. To Mihailov at that
moment, excited by visitors, it was extremely distasteful to speak of money matters.
"It is put up there to be sold," he answered, scowling gloomily.
When the visitors had gone, Mihailov sat down opposite the picture of Pilate
and Christ, and in his mind went over what had been said, and what, though not
said, had been implied by those visitors. And, strange to say, what had had such
weight with him, while they were there and while he mentally put himself at their
point of view, suddenly lost all importance for him. He began to look at his picture
with all his own full artist vision, and was soon in that mood of conviction of the
perfectibility, and so of the signiﬁcance, of his picture—a conviction essential to
the most intense fervor, excluding all other interests—in which alone he could
work.
Christ’s foreshortened leg was not right, though. He took his palee and
began to work. As he corrected the leg he looked continually at the ﬁgure of John
in the background, which his visitors had not even noticed, but which he knew
was beyond perfection. When he had ﬁnished the leg he wanted to touch that
ﬁgure, but he felt too much excited for it. He was equally unable to work when
he was cold and when he was too much aﬀected and saw everything too much.
ere was only one stage in the transition from coldness to inspiration, at which
work was possible. Today he was too much agitated. He would have covered
the picture, but he stopped, holding the cloth in his hand, and, smiling blissfully,
gazed a long while at the ﬁgure of John. At last, as it were regretfully tearing
himself away, he dropped the cloth, and, exhausted but happy, went home.
Vronsky, Anna, and Golenishtchev, on their way home, were particularly
lively and cheerful. ey talked of Mihailov and his pictures. e word talent,
by which they meant an inborn, almost physical, aptitude apart from brain and
heart, and in which they tried to ﬁnd an expression for all the artist had gained
from life, recurred particularly oen in their talk, as though it were necessary for
them to sum up what they had no conception of, though they wanted to talk of
it. ey said that there was no denying his talent, but that his talent could not
develop for want of education—the common defect of our Russian artists. But
the picture of the boys had imprinted itself on their memories, and they were
continually coming back to it. "What an exquisite thing! How he has succeeded
in it, and how simply! He doesn’t even comprehend how good it is. Yes, I mustn’t
let it slip; I must buy it," said Vronsky.

Chapter 

cdxxx
Mihailov sold Vronsky his picture, and agreed to paint a portrait of Anna. On the
day ﬁxed he came and began the work.
From the ﬁh siing the portrait impressed everyone, especially Vronsky,
not only by its resemblance, but by its characteristic beauty. It was strange how
Mihailov could have discovered just her characteristic beauty. "One needs to
know and love her as I have loved her to discover the very sweetest expression
of her soul," Vronsky thought, though it was only from this portrait that he had
himself learned this sweetest expression of her soul. But the expression was so
true that he, and others too, fancied they had long known it.
"I have been struggling on for ever so long without doing anything," he
said of his own portrait of her, "and he just looked and painted it. at’s where
technique comes in."
"at will come," was the consoling reassurance given him by Golenishtchev, in whose view Vronsky had both talent, and what was most important,
culture, giving him a wider outlook on art. Golenishtchev’s faith in Vronsky’s
talent was propped up by his own need of Vronsky’s sympathy and approval for
his own articles and ideas, and he felt that the praise and support must be mutual.
In another man’s house, and especially in Vronsky’s palazzo, Mihailov was
quite a diﬀerent man from what he was in his studio. He behaved with hostile
courtesy, as though he were afraid of coming closer to people he did not respect.
He called Vronsky "your excellency," and notwithstanding Anna’s and Vronsky’s
invitations, he would never stay to dinner, nor come except for the siings. Anna
was even more friendly to him than to other people, and was very grateful for her
portrait. Vronsky was more than cordial with him, and was obviously interested
to know the artist’s opinion of his picture. Golenishtchev never let slip an opportunity of instilling sound ideas about art into Mihailov. But Mihailov remained
equally chilly to all of them. Anna was aware from his eyes that he liked looking
at her, but he avoided conversation with her. Vronsky’s talk about his painting he
met with stubborn silence, and he was as stubbornly silent when he was shown
Vronsky’s picture. He was unmistakably bored by Golenishtchev’s conversation,
and he did not aempt to oppose him.
Altogether Mihailov, with his reserved and disagreeable, as it were, hostile
aitude, was quite disliked by them as they got to know him beer; and they were
glad when the siings were over, and they were le with a magniﬁcent portrait
in their possession, and he gave up coming. Golenishtchev was the ﬁrst to give
expression to an idea that had occurred to all of them, which was that Mihailov
was simply jealous of Vronsky.
"Not envious, let us say, since he has talent; but it annoys him that a wealthy
man of the highest society, and a count, too (you know they all detest a title), can,
without any particular trouble, do as well, if not beer, than he who has devoted

cdxxxi
all his life to it. And more than all, it’s a question of culture, which he is without."
Vronsky defended Mihailov, but at the boom of his heart he believed it,
because in his view a man of a diﬀerent, lower world would be sure to be envious.
Anna’s portrait—the same subject painted from nature both by him and by
Mihailov—ought to have shown Vronsky the diﬀerence between him and Mihailov; but he did not see it. Only aer Mihailov’s portrait was painted he le
oﬀ painting his portrait of Anna, deciding that it was now not needed. His picture of mediaeval life he went on with. And he himself, and Golenishtchev, and
still more Anna, thought it very good, because it was far more like the celebrated
pictures they knew than Mihailov’s picture.
Mihailov meanwhile, although Anna’s portrait greatly fascinated him, was
even more glad than they were when the siings were over, and he had no longer
to listen to Golenishtchev’s disquisitions upon art, and could forget about Vronsky’s painting. He knew that Vronsky could not be prevented from amusing himself with painting; he knew that he and all dileanti had a perfect right to paint
what they liked, but it was distasteful to him. A man could not be prevented from
making himself a big wax doll, and kissing it. But if the man were to come with
the doll and sit before a man in love, and begin caressing his doll as the lover
caressed the woman he loved, it would be distasteful to the lover. Just such a distasteful sensation was what Mihailov felt at the sight of Vronsky’s painting: he
felt it both ludicrous and irritating, both pitiable and oﬀensive.
Vronsky’s interest in painting and the Middle Ages did not last long. He had
enough taste for painting to be unable to ﬁnish his picture. e picture came to
a standstill. He was vaguely aware that its defects, inconspicuous at ﬁrst, would
be glaring if he were to go on with it. e same experience befell him as Golenishtchev, who felt that he had nothing to say, and continually deceived himself
with the theory that his idea was not yet mature, that he was working it out and
collecting materials. is exasperated and tortured Golenishtchev, but Vronsky
was incapable of deceiving and torturing himself, and even more incapable of exasperation. With his characteristic decision, without explanation or apology, he
simply ceased working at painting.
But without this occupation, the life of Vronsky and of Anna, who wondered at his loss of interest in it, struck them as intolerably tedious in an Italian
town. e palazzo suddenly seemed so obtrusively old and dirty, the spots on
the curtains, the cracks in the ﬂoors, the broken plaster on the cornices became
so disagreeably obvious, and the everlasting sameness of Golenishtchev, and the
Italian professor and the German traveler became so wearisome, that they had to
make some change. ey resolved to go to Russia, to the country. In Petersburg
Vronsky intended to arrange a partition of the land with his brother, while Anna
meant to see her son. e summer they intended to spend on Vronsky’s great

cdxxxii
family estate.

Chapter 
Levin had been married three months. He was happy, but not at all in the way he
had expected to be. At every step he found his former dreams disappointed, and
new, unexpected surprises of happiness. He was happy; but on entering upon
family life he saw at every step that it was uerly diﬀerent from what he had
imagined. At every step he experienced what a man would experience who, aer
admiring the smooth, happy course of a lile boat on a lake, should get himself
into that lile boat. He saw that it was not all siing still, ﬂoating smoothly; that
one had to think too, not for an instant to forget where one was ﬂoating; and that
there was water under one, and that one must row; and that his unaccustomed
hands would be sore; and that it was only to look at it that was easy; but that
doing it, though very delightful, was very diﬃcult.
As a bachelor, when he had watched other people’s married life, seen the
pey cares, the squabbles, the jealousy, he had only smiled contemptuously in his
heart. In his future married life there could be, he was convinced, nothing of that
sort; even the external forms, indeed, he fancied, must be uerly unlike the life of
others in everything. And all of a sudden, instead of his life with his wife being
made on an individual paern, it was, on the contrary, entirely made up of the
peiest details, which he had so despised before, but which now, by no will of
his own, had gained an extraordinary importance that it was useless to contend
against. And Levin saw that the organization of all these details was by no means
so easy as he had fancied before. Although Levin believed himself to have the
most exact conceptions of domestic life, unconsciously, like all men, he pictured
domestic life as the happiest enjoyment of love, with nothing to hinder and no
pey cares to distract. He ought, as he conceived the position, to do his work,
and to ﬁnd repose from it in the happiness of love. She ought to be beloved,
and nothing more. But, like all men, he forgot that she too would want work.
And he was surprised that she, his poetic, exquisite Kiy, could, not merely in
the ﬁrst weeks, but even in the ﬁrst days of their married life, think, remember,
and busy herself about tablecloths, and furniture, about maresses for visitors,
about a tray, about the cook, and the dinner, and so on. While they were still
engaged, he had been struck by the deﬁniteness with which she had declined the
tour abroad and decided to go into the country, as though she knew of something
she wanted, and could still think of something outside her love. is had jarred
upon him then, and now her trivial cares and anxieties jarred upon him several
times. But he saw that this was essential for her. And, loving her as he did,

cdxxxiii
though he did not understand the reason of them, and jeered at these domestic
pursuits, he could not help admiring them. He jeered at the way in which she
arranged the furniture they had brought from Moscow; rearranged their room;
hung up curtains; prepared rooms for visitors; a room for Dolly; saw aer an
abode for her new maid; ordered dinner of the old cook; came into collision with
Agafea Mihalovna, taking from her the charge of the stores. He saw how the old
cook smiled, admiring her, and listening to her inexperienced, impossible orders,
how mournfully and tenderly Agafea Mihalovna shook her head over the young
mistress’s new arrangements. He saw that Kiy was extraordinarily sweet when,
laughing and crying, she came to tell him that her maid, Masha, was used to
looking upon her as her young lady, and so no one obeyed her. It seemed to him
sweet, but strange, and he thought it would have been beer without this.
He did not know how great a sense of change she was experiencing; she,
who at home had sometimes wanted some favorite dish, or sweets, without the
possibility of geing either, now could order what she liked, buy pounds of sweets,
spend as much money as she liked, and order any puddings she pleased.
She was dreaming with delight now of Dolly’s coming to them with her
children, especially because she would order for the children their favorite puddings and Dolly would appreciate all her new housekeeping. She did not know
herself why and wherefore, but the arranging of her house had an irresistible attraction for her. Instinctively feeling the approach of spring, and knowing that
there would be days of rough weather too, she built her nest as best she could,
and was in haste at the same time to build it and to learn how to do it.
is care for domestic details in Kiy, so opposed to Levin’s ideal of exalted
happiness, was at ﬁrst one of the disappointments; and this sweet care of her
household, the aim of which he did not understand, but could not help loving,
was one of the new happy surprises.
Another disappointment and happy surprise came in their quarrels. Levin
could never have conceived that between him and his wife any relations could
arise other than tender, respectful and loving, and all at once in the very early
days they quarreled, so that she said he did not care for her, that he cared for no
one but himself, burst into tears, and wrung her arms.
is ﬁrst quarrel arose from Levin’s having gone out to a new farmhouse
and having been away half an hour too long, because he had tried to get home by
a short cut and had lost his way. He drove home thinking of nothing but her, of
her love, of his own happiness, and the nearer he drew to home, the warmer was
his tenderness for her. He ran into the room with the same feeling, with an even
stronger feeling than he had had when he reached the Shtcherbatskys’ house to
make his oﬀer. And suddenly he was met by a lowering expression he had never
seen in her. He would have kissed her; she pushed him away.

cdxxxiv
"What is it?"
"You’ve been enjoying yourself," she began, trying to be calm and spiteful.
But as soon as she opened her mouth, a stream of reproach, of senseless jealousy,
of all that had been torturing her during that half hour which she had spent siing
motionless at the window, burst from her. It was only then, for the ﬁrst time, that
he clearly understood what he had not understood when he led her out of the
church aer the wedding. He felt now that he was not simply close to her, but that
he did not know where he ended and she began. He felt this from the agonizing
sensation of division that he experienced at that instant. He was oﬀended for the
ﬁrst instant, but the very same second he felt that he could not be oﬀended by her,
that she was himself. He felt for the ﬁrst moment as a man feels when, having
suddenly received a violent blow from behind, he turns round, angry and eager
to avenge himself, to look for his antagonist, and ﬁnds that it is he himself who
has accidentally struck himself, that there is no one to be angry with, and that he
must put up with and try to soothe the pain.
Never aerwards did he feel it with such intensity, but this ﬁrst time he
could not for a long while get over it. His natural feeling urged him to defend
himself, to prove to her she was wrong; but to prove her wrong would mean
irritating her still more and making the rupture greater that was the cause of all
his suﬀering. One habitual feeling impelled him to get rid of the blame and to pass
it on to her. Another feeling, even stronger, impelled him as quickly as possible
to smooth over the rupture without leing it grow greater. To remain under such
undeserved reproach was wretched, but to make her suﬀer by justifying himself
was worse still. Like a man half-awake in an agony of pain, he wanted to tear out,
to ﬂing away the aching place, and coming to his senses, he felt that the aching
place was himself. He could do nothing but try to help the aching place to bear
it, and this he tried to do.
ey made peace. She, recognizing that she was wrong, though she did not
say so, became tenderer to him, and they experienced new, redoubled happiness
in their love. But that did not prevent such quarrels from happening again, and
exceedingly oen too, on the most unexpected and trivial grounds. ese quarrels
frequently arose from the fact that they did not yet know what was of importance
to each other and that all this early period they were both oen in a bad temper.
When one was in a good temper, and the other in a bad temper, the peace was not
broken; but when both happened to be in an ill-humor, quarrels sprang up from
such incomprehensibly triﬂing causes, that they could never remember aerwards
what they had quarreled about. It is true that when they were both in a good
temper their enjoyment of life was redoubled. But still this ﬁrst period of their
married life was a diﬃcult time for them.
During all this early time they had a peculiarly vivid sense of tension, as

cdxxxv
it were, a tugging in opposite directions of the chain by which they were bound.
Altogether their honeymoon—that is to say, the month aer their wedding—from
which from tradition Levin expected so much, was not merely not a time of sweetness, but remained in the memories of both as the bierest and most humiliating
period in their lives. ey both alike tried in later life to blot out from their memories all the monstrous, shameful incidents of that morbid period, when both were
rarely in a normal frame of mind, both were rarely quite themselves.
It was only in the third month of their married life, aer their return from
Moscow, where they had been staying for a month, that their life began to go
more smoothly.

Chapter 
ey had just come back from Moscow, and were glad to be alone. He was sitting at the writing table in his study, writing. She, wearing the dark lilac dress
she had worn during the ﬁrst days of their married life, and put on again today,
a dress particularly remembered and loved by him, was siing on the sofa, the
same old-fashioned leather sofa which had always stood in the study in Levin’s
father’s and grandfather’s days. She was sewing at broderie anglaise. He thought
and wrote, never losing the happy consciousness of her presence. His work, both
on the land and on the book, in which the principles of the new land system were
to be laid down, had not been abandoned; but just as formerly these pursuits and
ideas had seemed to him pey and trivial in comparison with the darkness that
overspread all life, now they seemed as unimportant and pey in comparison with
the life that lay before him suﬀused with the brilliant light of happiness. He went
on with his work, but he felt now that the center of gravity of his aention had
passed to something else, and that consequently he looked at his work quite differently and more clearly. Formerly this work had been for him an escape from
life. Formerly he had felt that without this work his life would be too gloomy.
Now these pursuits were necessary for him that life might not be too uniformly
bright. Taking up his manuscript, reading through what he had wrien, he found
with pleasure that the work was worth his working at. Many of his old ideas
seemed to him superﬂuous and extreme, but many blanks became distinct to him
when he reviewed the whole thing in his memory. He was writing now a new
chapter on the causes of the present disastrous condition of agriculture in Russia.
He maintained that the poverty of Russia arises not merely from the anomalous
distribution of landed property and misdirected reforms, but that what had contributed of late years to this result was the civilization from without abnormally
graed upon Russia, especially facilities of communication, as railways, leading

cdxxxvi
to centralization in towns, the development of luxury, and the consequent development of manufactures, credit and its accompaniment of speculation—all to the
detriment of agriculture. It seemed to him that in a normal development of wealth
in a state all these phenomena would arise only when a considerable amount of
labor had been put into agriculture, when it had come under regular, or at least
deﬁnite, conditions; that the wealth of a country ought to increase proportionally, and especially in such a way that other sources of wealth should not outstrip
agriculture; that in harmony with a certain stage of agriculture there should be
means of communication corresponding to it, and that in our unseled condition
of the land, railways, called into being by political and not by economic needs,
were premature, and instead of promoting agriculture, as was expected of them,
they were competing with agriculture and promoting the development of manufactures and credit, and so arresting its progress; and that just as the one-sided and
premature development of one organ in an animal would hinder its general development, so in the general development of wealth in Russia, credit, facilities of
communication, manufacturing activity, indubitably necessary in Europe, where
they had arisen in their proper time, had with us only done harm, by throwing
into the background the chief question calling for selement—the question of the
organization of agriculture.
While he was writing his ideas she was thinking how unnaturally cordial
her husband had been to young Prince Tcharsky, who had, with great want of
tact, ﬂirted with her the day before they le Moscow. "He’s jealous," she thought.
"Goodness! how sweet and silly he is! He’s jealous of me! If he knew that I think
no more of them than of Piotr the cook," she thought, looking at his head and red
neck with a feeling of possession strange to herself. "ough it’s a pity to take
him from his work (but he has plenty of time!), I must look at his face; will he feel
I’m looking at him? I wish he’d turn round … I’ll will him to!" and she opened her
eyes wide, as though to intensify the inﬂuence of her gaze.
"Yes, they draw away all the sap and give a false appearance of prosperity," he muered, stopping to write, and, feeling that she was looking at him and
smiling, he looked round.
"Well?" he queried, smiling, and geing up.
"He looked round," she thought.
"It’s nothing; I wanted you to look round," she said, watching him, and trying to guess whether he was vexed at being interrupted or not.
"How happy we are alone together!—I am, that is," he said, going up to her
with a radiant smile of happiness.
"I’m just as happy. I’ll never go anywhere, especially not to Moscow."
"And what were you thinking about?"
"I? I was thinking…. No, no, go along, go on writing; don’t break oﬀ," she

cdxxxvii
said, pursing up her lips, "and I must cut out these lile holes now, do you see?"
She took up her scissors and began cuing them out.
"No; tell me, what was it?" he said, siing down beside her and watching
the tiny scissors moving round.
"Oh! what was I thinking about? I was thinking about Moscow, about the
back of your head."
"Why should I, of all people, have such happiness! It’s unnatural, too good,"
he said, kissing her hand.
"I feel quite the opposite; the beer things are, the more natural it seems to
me."
"And you’ve got a lile curl loose," he said, carefully turning her head round.
"A lile curl, oh yes. No, no, we are busy at our work!"
Work did not progress further, and they darted apart from one another like
culprits when Kouzma came in to announce that tea was ready.
"Have they come from the town?" Levin asked Kouzma.
"ey’ve just come; they’re unpacking the things."
"Come quickly," she said to him as she went out of the study, "or else I shall
read your leers without you."
Le alone, aer puing his manuscripts together in the new portfolio
bought by her, he washed his hands at the new washstand with the elegant
ﬁings, that had all made their appearance with her. Levin smiled at his own
thoughts, and shook his head disapprovingly at those thoughts; a feeling akin to
remorse freed him. ere was something shameful, eﬀeminate, Capuan, as he
called it to himself, in his present mode of life. "It’s not right to go on like this," he
thought. "It’ll soon be three months, and I’m doing next to nothing. Today, almost
for the ﬁrst time, I set to work seriously, and what happened? I did nothing but
begin and throw it aside. Even my ordinary pursuits I have almost given up. On
the land I scarcely walk or drive about at all to look aer things. Either I am loath
to leave her, or I see she’s dull alone. And I used to think that, before marriage,
life was nothing much, somehow didn’t count, but that aer marriage, life began
in earnest. And here almost three months have passed, and I have spent my time
so idly and unproﬁtably. No, this won’t do; I must begin. Of course, it’s not her
fault. She’s not to blame in any way. I ought myself to be ﬁrmer, to maintain my
masculine independence of action; or else I shall get into such ways, and she’ll
get used to them too…. Of course she’s not to blame," he told himself.
But it is hard for anyone who is dissatisﬁed not to blame someone else, and
especially the person nearest of all to him, for the ground of his dissatisfaction.
And it vaguely came into Levin’s mind that she herself was not to blame (she
could not be to blame for anything), but what was to blame was her education,
too superﬁcial and frivolous. ("at fool Tcharsky: she wanted, I know, to stop

cdxxxviii
him, but didn’t know how to.") "Yes, apart from her interest in the house (that
she has), apart from dress and broderie anglaise, she has no serious interests. No
interest in her work, in the estate, in the peasants, nor in music, though she’s
rather good at it, nor in reading. She does nothing, and is perfectly satisﬁed."
Levin, in his heart, censured this, and did not as yet understand that she was
preparing for that period of activity which was to come for her when she would
at once be the wife of her husband and mistress of the house, and would bear, and
nurse, and bring up children. He knew not that she was instinctively aware of
this, and preparing herself for this time of terrible toil, did not reproach herself
for the moments of carelessness and happiness in her love that she enjoyed now
while gaily building her nest for the future.

Chapter 
When Levin went upstairs, his wife was siing near the new silver samovar behind the new tea service, and, having seled old Agafea Mihalovna at a lile table
with a full cup of tea, was reading a leer from Dolly, with whom they were in
continual and frequent correspondence.
"You see, your good lady’s seled me here, told me to sit a bit with her," said
Agafea Mihalovna, smiling aﬀectionately at Kiy.
In these words of Agafea Mihalovna, Levin read the ﬁnal act of the drama
which had been enacted of late between her and Kiy. He saw that, in spite
of Agafea Mihalovna’s feelings being hurt by a new mistress taking the reins of
government out of her hands, Kiy had yet conquered her and made her love her.
"Here, I opened your leer too," said Kiy, handing him an illiterate leer.
"It’s from that woman, I think, your brother’s…" she said. "I did not read it through.
is is from my people and from Dolly. Fancy! Dolly took Tanya and Grisha to a
children’s ball at the Sarmatskys’: Tanya was a French marquise."
But Levin did not hear her. Flushing, he took the leer from Marya Nikolaevna, his brother’s former mistress, and began to read it. is was the second
leer he had received from Marya Nikolaevna. In the ﬁrst leer, Marya Nikolaevna wrote that his brother had sent her away for no fault of hers, and, with
touching simplicity, added that though she was in want again, she asked for nothing, and wished for nothing, but was only tormented by the thought that Nikolay
Dmitrievitch would come to grief without her, owing to the weak state of his
health, and begged his brother to look aer him. Now she wrote quite diﬀerently.
She had found Nikolay Dmitrievitch, had again made it up with him in Moscow,
and had moved with him to a provincial town, where he had received a post in
the government service. But that he had quarreled with the head oﬃcial, and was

cdxxxix
on his way back to Moscow, only he had been taken so ill on the road that it was
doubtful if he would ever leave his bed again, she wrote. "It’s always of you he
has talked, and, besides, he has no more money le."
"Read this; Dolly writes about you," Kiy was beginning, with a smile; but
she stopped suddenly, noticing the changed expression on her husband’s face.
"What is it? What’s the maer?"
"She writes to me that Nikolay, my brother, is at death’s door. I shall go to
him."
Kiy’s face changed at once. oughts of Tanya as a marquise, of Dolly, all
had vanished.
"When are you going?" she said.
"Tomorrow."
"And I will go with you, can I?" she said.
"Kiy! What are you thinking o?" he said reproachfully.
"How do you mean?" oﬀended that he should seem to take her suggestion
unwillingly and with vexation. "Why shouldn’t I go? I shan’t be in your way. I…"
"I’m going because my brother is dying," said Levin. "Why should you…"
"Why? For the same reason as you."
"And, at a moment of such gravity for me, she only thinks of her being dull
by herself," thought Levin. And this lack of candor in a maer of such gravity
infuriated him.
"It’s out of the question," he said sternly.
Agafea Mihalovna, seeing that it was coming to a quarrel, gently put down
her cup and withdrew. Kiy did not even notice her. e tone in which her
husband had said the last words wounded her, especially because he evidently
did not believe what she had said.
"I tell you, that if you go, I shall come with you; I shall certainly come," she
said hastily and wrathfully. "Why out of the question? Why do you say it’s out
of the question?"
"Because it’ll be going God knows where, by all sorts of roads and to all
sorts of hotels. You would be a hindrance to me," said Levin, trying to be cool.
"Not at all. I don’t want anything. Where you can go, I can…."
"Well, for one thing then, because this woman’s there whom you can’t meet."
"I don’t know and don’t care to know who’s there and what. I know that
my husband’s brother is dying and my husband is going to him, and I go with my
husband too…."
"Kiy! Don’t get angry. But just think a lile: this is a maer of such importance that I can’t bear to think that you should bring in a feeling of weakness,
of dislike to being le alone. Come, you’ll be dull alone, so go and stay at Moscow
a lile."

cdxl
"ere, you always ascribe base, vile motives to me," she said with tears of
wounded pride and fury. "I didn’t mean, it wasn’t weakness, it wasn’t … I feel that
it’s my duty to be with my husband when he’s in trouble, but you try on purpose
to hurt me, you try on purpose not to understand…."
"No; this is awful! To be such a slave!" cried Levin, geing up, and unable to
restrain his anger any longer. But at the same second he felt that he was beating
himself.
"en why did you marry? You could have been free. Why did you, if you
regret it?" she said, geing up and running away into the drawing room.
When he went to her, she was sobbing.
He began to speak, trying to ﬁnd words not to dissuade but simply to soothe
her. But she did not heed him, and would not agree to anything. He bent down
to her and took her hand, which resisted him. He kissed her hand, kissed her hair,
kissed her hand again—still she was silent. But when he took her face in both his
hands and said "Kiy!" she suddenly recovered herself, and began to cry, and they
were reconciled.
It was decided that they should go together the next day. Levin told his wife
that he believed she wanted to go simply in order to be of use, agreed that Marya
Nikolaevna’s being with his brother did not make her going improper, but he set
oﬀ at the boom of his heart dissatisﬁed both with her and with himself. He was
dissatisﬁed with her for being unable to make up her mind to let him go when it
was necessary (and how strange it was for him to think that he, so lately hardly
daring to believe in such happiness as that she could love him—now was unhappy
because she loved him too much!), and he was dissatisﬁed with himself for not
showing more strength of will. Even greater was the feeling of disagreement at
the boom of his heart as to her not needing to consider the woman who was
with his brother, and he thought with horror of all the contingencies they might
meet with. e mere idea of his wife, his Kiy, being in the same room with a
common wench, set him shuddering with horror and loathing.

Chapter 
e hotel of the provincial town where Nikolay Levin was lying ill was one of
those provincial hotels which are constructed on the newest model of modern improvements, with the best intentions of cleanliness, comfort, and even elegance,
but owing to the public that patronizes them, are with astounding rapidity transformed into ﬁlthy taverns with a pretension of modern improvement that only
makes them worse than the old-fashioned, honestly ﬁlthy hotels. is hotel had
already reached that stage, and the soldier in a ﬁlthy uniform smoking in the

cdxli
entry, supposed to stand for a hall-porter, and the cast-iron, slippery, dark, and
disagreeable staircase, and the free and easy waiter in a ﬁlthy frock coat, and the
common dining room with a dusty bouquet of wax ﬂowers adorning the table, and
ﬁlth, dust, and disorder everywhere, and at the same time the sort of modern upto-date self-complacent railway uneasiness of this hotel, aroused a most painful
feeling in Levin aer their fresh young life, especially because the impression of
falsity made by the hotel was so out of keeping with what awaited them.
As is invariably the case, aer they had been asked at what price they
wanted rooms, it appeared that there was not one decent room for them; one
decent room had been taken by the inspector of railroads, another by a lawyer
from Moscow, a third by Princess Astaﬁeva from the country. ere remained
only one ﬁlthy room, next to which they promised that another should be empty
by the evening. Feeling angry with his wife because what he had expected had
come to pass, which was that at the moment of arrival, when his heart throbbed
with emotion and anxiety to know how his brother was geing on, he should have
to be seeing aer her, instead of rushing straight to his brother, Levin conducted
her to the room assigned them.
"Go, do go!" she said, looking at him with timid and guilty eyes.
He went out of the door without a word, and at once stumbled over Marya
Nikolaevna, who had heard of his arrival and had not dared to go in to see him.
She was just the same as when he saw her in Moscow; the same woolen gown,
and bare arms and neck, and the same good-naturedly stupid, pockmarked face,
only a lile plumper.
"Well, how is he? how is he?"
"Very bad. He can’t get up. He has kept expecting you. He…. Are you …
with your wife?"
Levin did not for the ﬁrst moment understand what it was confused her, but
she immediately enlightened him.
"I’ll go away. I’ll go down to the kitchen," she brought out. "Nikolay
Dmitrievitch will be delighted. He heard about it, and knows your lady, and remembers her abroad."
Levin realized that she meant his wife, and did not know what answer to
make.
"Come along, come along to him!" he said.
But as soon as he moved, the door of his room opened and Kiy peeped out.
Levin crimsoned both from shame and anger with his wife, who had put herself
and him in such a diﬃcult position; but Marya Nikolaevna crimsoned still more.
She positively shrank together and ﬂushed to the point of tears, and clutching the
ends of her apron in both hands, twisted them in her red ﬁngers without knowing
what to say and what to do.

cdxlii
For the ﬁrst instant Levin saw an expression of eager curiosity in the eyes
with which Kiy looked at this awful woman, so incomprehensible to her; but it
lasted only a single instant.
"Well! how is he?" she turned to her husband and then to her.
"But one can’t go on talking in the passage like this!" Levin said, looking
angrily at a gentleman who walked jauntily at that instant across the corridor, as
though about his aﬀairs.
"Well then, come in," said Kiy, turning to Marya Nikolaevna, who had recovered herself, but noticing her husband’s face of dismay, "or go on; go, and then
come for me," she said, and went back into the room.
Levin went to his brother’s room. He had not in the least expected what he
saw and felt in his brother’s room. He had expected to ﬁnd him in the same state
of self-deception which he had heard was so frequent with the consumptive, and
which had struck him so much during his brother’s visit in the autumn. He had
expected to ﬁnd the physical signs of the approach of death more marked—greater
weakness, greater emaciation, but still almost the same condition of things. He
had expected himself to feel the same distress at the loss of the brother he loved
and the same horror in face of death as he had felt then, only in a greater degree.
And he had prepared himself for this; but he found something uerly diﬀerent.
In a lile dirty room with the painted panels of its walls ﬁlthy with spile,
and conversation audible through the thin partition from the next room, in a stiﬂing atmosphere saturated with impurities, on a bedstead moved away from the
wall, there lay covered with a quilt, a body. One arm of this body was above the
quilt, and the wrist, huge as a rake-handle, was aached, inconceivably it seemed,
to the thin, long bone of the arm smooth from the beginning to the middle. e
head lay sideways on the pillow. Levin could see the scanty locks wet with sweat
on the temples and tense, transparent-looking forehead.
"It cannot be that that fearful body was my brother Nikolay?" thought Levin.
But he went closer, saw the face, and doubt became impossible. In spite of the
terrible change in the face, Levin had only to glance at those eager eyes raised
at his approach, only to catch the faint movement of the mouth under the sticky
mustache, to realize the terrible truth that this death-like body was his living
brother.
e gliering eyes looked sternly and reproachfully at his brother as he
drew near. And immediately this glance established a living relationship between
living men. Levin immediately felt the reproach in the eyes ﬁxed on him, and felt
remorse at his own happiness.
When Konstantin took him by the hand, Nikolay smiled. e smile was
faint, scarcely perceptible, and in spite of the smile the stern expression of the
eyes was unchanged.

cdxliii
"You did not expect to ﬁnd me like this," he articulated with eﬀort.
"Yes … no," said Levin, hesitating over his words. "How was it you didn’t
let me know before, that is, at the time of my wedding? I made inquiries in all
directions."
He had to talk so as not to be silent, and he did not know what to say, especially as his brother made no reply, and simply stared without dropping his
eyes, and evidently penetrated to the inner meaning of each word. Levin told his
brother that his wife had come with him. Nikolay expressed pleasure, but said
he was afraid of frightening her by his condition. A silence followed. Suddenly
Nikolay stirred, and began to say something. Levin expected something of peculiar gravity and importance from the expression of his face, but Nikolay began
speaking of his health. He found fault with the doctor, regreing he had not a
celebrated Moscow doctor. Levin saw that he still hoped.
Seizing the ﬁrst moment of silence, Levin got up, anxious to escape, if only
for an instant, from his agonizing emotion, and said that he would go and fetch
his wife.
"Very well, and I’ll tell her to tidy up here. It’s dirty and stinking here, I
expect. Marya! clear up the room," the sick man said with eﬀort. "Oh, and when
you’ve cleared up, go away yourself," he added, looking inquiringly at his brother.
Levin made no answer. Going out into the corridor, he stopped short. He
had said he would fetch his wife, but now, taking stock of the emotion he was
feeling, he decided that he would try on the contrary to persuade her not to go in
to the sick man. "Why should she suﬀer as I am suﬀering?" he thought.
"Well, how is he?" Kiy asked with a frightened face.
"Oh, it’s awful, it’s awful! What did you come for?" said Levin.
Kiy was silent for a few seconds, looking timidly and ruefully at her husband; then she went up and took him by the elbow with both hands.
"Kostya! take me to him; it will be easier for us to bear it together. You only
take me, take me to him, please, and go away," she said. "You must understand
that for me to see you, and not to see him, is far more painful. ere I might be a
help to you and to him. Please, let me!" she besought her husband, as though the
happiness of her life depended on it.
Levin was obliged to agree, and regaining his composure, and completely
forgeing about Marya Nikolaevna by now, he went again in to his brother with
Kiy.
Stepping lightly, and continually glancing at her husband, showing him a
valorous and sympathetic face, Kiy went into the sick-room, and, turning without haste, noiselessly closed the door. With inaudible steps she went quickly to
the sick man’s bedside, and going up so that he had not to turn his head, she immediately clasped in her fresh young hand the skeleton of his huge hand, pressed it,

cdxliv
and began speaking with that so eagerness, sympathetic and not jarring, which
is peculiar to women.
"We have met, though we were not acquainted, at Soden," she said. "You
never thought I was to be your sister?"
"You would not have recognized me?" he said, with a radiant smile at her
entrance.
"Yes, I should. What a good thing you let us know! Not a day has passed
that Kostya has not mentioned you, and been anxious."
But the sick man’s interest did not last long.
Before she had ﬁnished speaking, there had come back into his face the
stern, reproachful expression of the dying man’s envy of the living.
"I am afraid you are not quite comfortable here," she said, turning away from
his ﬁxed stare, and looking about the room. "We must ask about another room,"
she said to her husband, "so that we might be nearer."

Chapter 
Levin could not look calmly at his brother; he could not himself be natural and
calm in his presence. When he went in to the sick man, his eyes and his aention
were unconsciously dimmed, and he did not see and did not distinguish the details
of his brother’s position. He smelt the awful odor, saw the dirt, disorder, and
miserable condition, and heard the groans, and felt that nothing could be done to
help. It never entered his head to analyze the details of the sick man’s situation,
to consider how that body was lying under the quilt, how those emaciated legs
and thighs and spine were lying huddled up, and whether they could not be made
more comfortable, whether anything could not be done to make things, if not
beer, at least less bad. It made his blood run cold when he began to think of all
these details. He was absolutely convinced that nothing could be done to prolong
his brother’s life or to relieve his suﬀering. But a sense of his regarding all aid as
out of the question was felt by the sick man, and exasperated him. And this made
it still more painful for Levin. To be in the sick-room was agony to him, not to be
there still worse. And he was continually, on various pretexts, going out of the
room, and coming in again, because he was unable to remain alone.
But Kiy thought, and felt, and acted quite diﬀerently. On seeing the sick
man, she pitied him. And pity in her womanly heart did not arouse at all that
feeling of horror and loathing that it aroused in her husband, but a desire to act,
to ﬁnd out all the details of his state, and to remedy them. And since she had not
the slightest doubt that it was her duty to help him, she had no doubt either that
it was possible, and immediately set to work. e very details, the mere thought

cdxlv
of which reduced her husband to terror, immediately engaged her aention. She
sent for the doctor, sent to the chemist’s, set the maid who had come with her and
Marya Nikolaevna to sweep and dust and scrub; she herself washed up something,
washed out something else, laid something under the quilt. Something was by her
directions brought into the sick-room, something else was carried out. She herself
went several times to her room, regardless of the men she met in the corridor, got
out and brought in sheets, pillow cases, towels, and shirts.
e waiter, who was busy with a party of engineers dining in the dining
hall, came several times with an irate countenance in answer to her summons,
and could not avoid carrying out her orders, as she gave them with such gracious
insistence that there was no evading her. Levin did not approve of all this; he did
not believe it would be of any good to the patient. Above all, he feared the patient
would be angry at it. But the sick man, though he seemed and was indiﬀerent
about it, was not angry, but only abashed, and on the whole as it were interested
in what she was doing with him. Coming back from the doctor to whom Kiy had
sent him, Levin, on opening the door, came upon the sick man at the instant when,
by Kiy’s directions, they were changing his linen. e long white ridge of his
spine, with the huge, prominent shoulder blades and juing ribs and vertebrae,
was bare, and Marya Nikolaevna and the waiter were struggling with the sleeve
of the night shirt, and could not get the long, limp arm into it. Kiy, hurriedly
closing the door aer Levin, was not looking that way; but the sick man groaned,
and she moved rapidly towards him.
"Make haste," she said.
"Oh, don’t you come," said the sick man angrily. "I’ll do it my myself…."
"What say?" queried Marya Nikolaevna. But Kiy heard and saw he was
ashamed and uncomfortable at being naked before her.
"I’m not looking, I’m not looking!" she said, puing the arm in. "Marya
Nikolaevna, you come this side, you do it," she added.
"Please go for me, there’s a lile bole in my small bag," she said, turning
to her husband, "you know, in the side pocket; bring it, please, and meanwhile
they’ll ﬁnish clearing up here."
Returning with the bole, Levin found the sick man seled comfortably
and everything about him completely changed. e heavy smell was replaced by
the smell of aromatic vinegar, which Kiy with pouting lips and puﬀed-out, rosy
cheeks was squirting through a lile pipe. ere was no dust visible anywhere,
a rug was laid by the bedside. On the table stood medicine boles and decanters
tidily arranged, and the linen needed was folded up there, and Kiy’s broderie
anglaise. On the other table by the patient’s bed there were candles and drink and
powders. e sick man himself, washed and combed, lay in clean sheets on high
raised pillows, in a clean night-shirt with a white collar about his astoundingly

cdxlvi
thin neck, and with a new expression of hope looked ﬁxedly at Kiy.
e doctor brought by Levin, and found by him at the club, was not the one
who had been aending Nikolay Levin, as the patient was dissatisﬁed with him.
e new doctor took up a stethoscope and sounded the patient, shook his head,
prescribed medicine, and with extreme minuteness explained ﬁrst how to take the
medicine and then what diet was to be kept to. He advised eggs, raw or hardly
cooked, and seltzer water, with warm milk at a certain temperature. When the
doctor had gone away the sick man said something to his brother, of which Levin
could distinguish only the last words: "Your Katya." By the expression with which
he gazed at her, Levin saw that he was praising her. He called indeed to Katya, as
he called her.
"I’m much beer already," he said. "Why, with you I should have got well
long ago. How nice it is!" he took her hand and drew it towards his lips, but as
though afraid she would dislike it he changed his mind, let it go, and only stroked
it. Kiy took his hand in both hers and pressed it.
"Now turn me over on the le side and go to bed," he said.
No one could make out what he said but Kiy; she alone understood. She
understood because she was all the while mentally keeping watch on what he
needed.
"On the other side," she said to her husband, "he always sleeps on that side.
Turn him over, it’s so disagreeable calling the servants. I’m not strong enough.
Can you?" she said to Marya Nikolaevna.
"I’m afraid not," answered Marya Nikolaevna.
Terrible as it was to Levin to put his arms round that terrible body, to take
hold of that under the quilt, of which he preferred to know nothing, under his
wife’s inﬂuence he made his resolute face that she knew so well, and puing his
arms into the bed took hold of the body, but in spite of his own strength he was
struck by the strange heaviness of those powerless limbs. While he was turning
him over, conscious of the huge emaciated arm about his neck, Kiy swily and
noiselessly turned the pillow, beat it up and seled in it the sick man’s head,
smoothing back his hair, which was sticking again to his moist brow.
e sick man kept his brother’s hand in his own. Levin felt that he meant
to do something with his hand and was pulling it somewhere. Levin yielded with
a sinking heart: yes, he drew it to his mouth and kissed it. Levin, shaking with
sobs and unable to articulate a word, went out of the room.

Chapter 
"ou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them

cdxlvii
unto babes." So Levin thought about his wife as he talked to her that evening.
Levin thought of the text, not because he considered himself "wise and prudent." He did not so consider himself, but he could not help knowing that he had
more intellect than his wife and Agafea Mihalovna, and he could not help knowing that when he thought of death, he thought with all the force of his intellect.
He knew too that the brains of many great men, whose thoughts he had read,
had brooded over death and yet knew not a hundredth part of what his wife and
Agafea Mihalovna knew about it. Diﬀerent as those two women were, Agafea
Mihalovna and Katya, as his brother Nikolay had called her, and as Levin particularly liked to call her now, they were quite alike in this. Both knew, without
a shade of doubt, what sort of thing life was and what was death, and though
neither of them could have answered, and would even not have understood the
questions that presented themselves to Levin, both had no doubt of the signiﬁcance of this event, and were precisely alike in their way of looking at it, which
they shared with millions of people. e proof that they knew for a certainty the
nature of death lay in the fact that they knew without a second of hesitation how
to deal with the dying, and were not frightened of them. Levin and other men
like him, though they could have said a great deal about death, obviously did not
know this since they were afraid of death, and were absolutely at a loss what to do
when people were dying. If Levin had been alone now with his brother Nikolay,
he would have looked at him with terror, and with still greater terror waited, and
would not have known what else to do.
More than that, he did not know what to say, how to look, how to move.
To talk of outside things seemed to him shocking, impossible, to talk of death and
depressing subjects—also impossible. To be silent, also impossible. "If I look at
him he will think I am studying him, I am afraid; if I don’t look at him, he’ll think
I’m thinking of other things. If I walk on tiptoe, he will be vexed; to tread ﬁrmly,
I’m ashamed." Kiy evidently did not think of herself, and had no time to think
about herself: she was thinking about him because she knew something, and all
went well. She told him about herself even and about her wedding, and smiled
and sympathized with him and peed him, and talked of cases of recovery and
all went well; so then she must know. e proof that her behavior and Agafea
Mihalovna’s was not instinctive, animal, irrational, was that apart from the physical treatment, the relief of suﬀering, both Agafea Mihalovna and Kiy required
for the dying man something else more important than the physical treatment,
and something which had nothing in common with physical conditions. Agafea
Mihalovna, speaking of the man just dead, had said: "Well, thank God, he took the
sacrament and received absolution; God grant each one of us such a death." Katya
in just the same way, besides all her care about linen, bedsores, drink, found time
the very ﬁrst day to persuade the sick man of the necessity of taking the sacrament

cdxlviii
and receiving absolution.
On geing back from the sick-room to their own two rooms for the night,
Levin sat with hanging head not knowing what to do. Not to speak of supper,
of preparing for bed, of considering what they were going to do, he could not
even talk to his wife; he was ashamed to. Kiy, on the contrary, was more active
than usual. She was even livelier than usual. She ordered supper to be brought,
herself unpacked their things, and herself helped to make the beds, and did not
even forget to sprinkle them with Persian powder. She showed that alertness,
that swiness of reﬂection comes out in men before a bale, in conﬂict, in the
dangerous and decisive moments of life—those moments when a man shows once
and for all his value, and that all his past has not been wasted but has been a
preparation for these moments.
Everything went rapidly in her hands, and before it was twelve o’clock all
their things were arranged cleanly and tidily in her rooms, in such a way that
the hotel rooms seemed like home: the beds were made, brushes, combs, lookingglasses were put out, table napkins were spread.
Levin felt that it was unpardonable to eat, to sleep, to talk even now, and
it seemed to him that every movement he made was unseemly. She arranged the
brushes, but she did it all so that there was nothing shocking in it.
ey could neither of them eat, however, and for a long while they could
not sleep, and did not even go to bed.
"I am very glad I persuaded him to receive extreme unction tomorrow," she
said, siing in her dressing jacket before her folding looking glass, combing her
so, fragrant hair with a ﬁne comb. "I have never seen it, but I know, mamma has
told me, there are prayers said for recovery."
"Do you suppose he can possibly recover?" said Levin, watching a slender
tress at the back of her round lile head that was continually hidden when she
passed the comb through the front.
"I asked the doctor; he said he couldn’t live more than three days. But can
they be sure? I’m very glad, anyway, that I persuaded him," she said, looking
askance at her husband through her hair. "Anything is possible," she added with
that peculiar, rather sly expression that was always in her face when she spoke of
religion.
Since their conversation about religion when they were engaged neither
of them had ever started a discussion of the subject, but she performed all the
ceremonies of going to church, saying her prayers, and so on, always with the
unvarying conviction that this ought to be so. In spite of his assertion to the
contrary, she was ﬁrmly persuaded that he was as much a Christian as she, and
indeed a far beer one; and all that he said about it was simply one of his absurd
masculine freaks, just as he would say about her broderie anglaise that good people

cdxlix
patch holes, but that she cut them on purpose, and so on.
"Yes, you see this woman, Marya Nikolaevna, did not know how to manage
all this," said Levin. "And … I must own I’m very, very glad you came. You are
such purity that…." He took her hand and did not kiss it (to kiss her hand in such
closeness to death seemed to him improper); he merely squeezed it with a penitent
air, looking at her brightening eyes.
"It would have been miserable for you to be alone," she said, and liing her
hands which hid her cheeks ﬂushing with pleasure, twisted her coil of hair on the
nape of her neck and pinned it there. "No," she went on, "she did not know how….
Luckily, I learned a lot at Soden."
"Surely there are not people there so ill?"
"Worse."
"What’s so awful to me is that I can’t see him as he was when he was young.
You would not believe how charming he was as a youth, but I did not understand
him then."
"I can quite, quite believe it. How I feel that we might have been friends!"
she said; and, distressed at what she had said, she looked round at her husband,
and tears came into her eyes.
"Yes, might have been," he said mournfully. "He’s just one of those people of
whom they say they’re not for this world."
"But we have many days before us; we must go to bed," said Kiy, glancing
at her tiny watch.

Chapter 
e next day the sick man received the sacrament and extreme unction. During the ceremony Nikolay Levin prayed fervently. His great eyes, fastened on
the holy image that was set out on a card table covered with a colored napkin,
expressed such passionate prayer and hope that it was awful to Levin to see it.
Levin knew that this passionate prayer and hope would only make him feel more
bierly parting from the life he so loved. Levin knew his brother and the workings
of his intellect: he knew that his unbelief came not from life being easier for him
without faith, but had grown up because step by step the contemporary scientiﬁc
interpretation of natural phenomena crushed out the possibility of faith; and so
he knew that his present return was not a legitimate one, brought about by way
of the same working of his intellect, but simply a temporary, interested return to
faith in a desperate hope of recovery. Levin knew too that Kiy had strengthened
his hope by accounts of the marvelous recoveries she had heard of. Levin knew
all this; and it was agonizingly painful to him to behold the supplicating, hopeful

cdl
eyes and the emaciated wrist, lied with diﬃculty, making the sign of the cross
on the tense brow, and the prominent shoulders and hollow, gasping chest, which
one could not feel consistent with the life the sick man was praying for. During
the sacrament Levin did what he, an unbeliever, had done a thousand times. He
said, addressing God, "If ou dost exist, make this man to recover" (of course this
same thing has been repeated many times), "and ou wilt save him and me."
Aer extreme unction the sick man became suddenly much beer. He did
not cough once in the course of an hour, smiled, kissed Kiy’s hand, thanking her
with tears, and said he was comfortable, free from pain, and that he felt strong and
had an appetite. He even raised himself when his soup was brought, and asked
for a cutlet as well. Hopelessly ill as he was, obvious as it was at the ﬁrst glance
that he could not recover, Levin and Kiy were for that hour both in the same
state of excitement, happy, though fearful of being mistaken.
"Is he beer?"
"Yes, much."
"It’s wonderful."
"ere’s nothing wonderful in it."
"Anyway, he’s beer," they said in a whisper, smiling to one another.
is self-deception was not of long duration. e sick man fell into a quiet
sleep, but he was waked up half an hour later by his cough. And all at once every
hope vanished in those about him and in himself. e reality of his suﬀering
crushed all hopes in Levin and Kiy and in the sick man himself, leaving no doubt,
no memory even of past hopes.
Without referring to what he had believed in half an hour before, as though
ashamed even to recall it, he asked for iodine to inhale in a bole covered with
perforated paper. Levin gave him the bole, and the same look of passionate
hope with which he had taken the sacrament was now fastened on his brother,
demanding from him the conﬁrmation of the doctor’s words that inhaling iodine
worked wonders.
"Is Katya not here?" he gasped, looking round while Levin reluctantly assented to the doctor’s words. "No; so I can say it…. It was for her sake I went
through that farce. She’s so sweet; but you and I can’t deceive ourselves. is is
what I believe in," he said, and, squeezing the bole in his bony hand, he began
breathing over it.
At eight o’clock in the evening Levin and his wife were drinking tea in their
room when Marya Nikolaevna ran in to them breathlessly. She was pale, and her
lips were quivering. "He is dying!" she whispered. "I’m afraid will die this minute."
Both of them ran to him. He was siing raised up with one elbow on the
bed, his long back bent, and his head hanging low.
"How do you feel?" Levin asked in a whisper, aer a silence.

cdli
"I feel I’m seing oﬀ," Nikolay said with diﬃculty, but with extreme distinctness, screwing the words out of himself. He did not raise his head, but simply turned his eyes upwards, without their reaching his brother’s face. "Katya, go
away!" he added.
Levin jumped up, and with a peremptory whisper made her go out.
"I’m seing oﬀ," he said again.
"Why do you think so?" said Levin, so as to say something.
"Because I’m seing oﬀ," he repeated, as though he had a liking for the
phrase. "It’s the end."
Marya Nikolaevna went up to him.
"You had beer lie down; you’d be easier," she said.
"I shall lie down soon enough," he pronounced slowly, "when I’m dead," he
said sarcastically, wrathfully. "Well, you can lay me down if you like."
Levin laid his brother on his back, sat down beside him, and gazed at his face,
holding his breath. e dying man lay with closed eyes, but the muscles twitched
from time to time on his forehead, as with one thinking deeply and intensely.
Levin involuntarily thought with him of what it was that was happening to him
now, but in spite of all his mental eﬀorts to go along with him he saw by the
expression of that calm, stern face that for the dying man all was growing clearer
and clearer that was still as dark as ever for Levin.
"Yes, yes, so," the dying man articulated slowly at intervals. "Wait a lile."
He was silent. "Right!" he pronounced all at once reassuringly, as though all were
solved for him. "O Lord!" he murmured, and sighed deeply.
Marya Nikolaevna felt his feet. "ey’re geing cold," she whispered.
For a long while, a very long while it seemed to Levin, the sick man lay
motionless. But he was still alive, and from time to time he sighed. Levin by now
was exhausted from mental strain. He felt that, with no mental eﬀort, could he
understand what it was that was right. He could not even think of the problem
of death itself, but with no will of his own thoughts kept coming to him of what
he had to do next; closing the dead man’s eyes, dressing him, ordering the coﬃn.
And, strange to say, he felt uerly cold, and was not conscious of sorrow nor of
loss, less still of pity for his brother. If he had any feeling for his brother at that
moment, it was envy for the knowledge the dying man had now that he could not
have.
A long time more he sat over him so, continually expecting the end. But
the end did not come. e door opened and Kiy appeared. Levin got up to stop
her. But at the moment he was geing up, he caught the sound of the dying man
stirring.
"Don’t go away," said Nikolay and held out his hand. Levin gave him his,
and angrily waved to his wife to go away.

cdlii
With the dying man’s hand in his hand, he sat for half an hour, an hour,
another hour. He did not think of death at all now. He wondered what Kiy was
doing; who lived in the next room; whether the doctor lived in a house of his own.
He longed for food and for sleep. He cautiously drew away his hand and felt the
feet. e feet were cold, but the sick man was still breathing. Levin tried again to
move away on tiptoe, but the sick man stirred again and said: "Don’t go."
――――
e dawn came; the sick man’s condition was unchanged. Levin stealthily withdrew his hand, and without looking at the dying man, went oﬀ to his own room
and went to sleep. When he woke up, instead of news of his brother’s death which
he expected, he learned that the sick man had returned to his earlier condition. He
had begun siing up again, coughing, had begun eating again, talking again, and
again had ceased to talk of death, again had begun to express hope of his recovery, and had become more irritable and more gloomy than ever. No one, neither
his brother nor Kiy, could soothe him. He was angry with everyone, and said
nasty things to everyone, reproached everyone for his suﬀerings, and insisted
that they should get him a celebrated doctor from Moscow. To all inquiries made
him as to how he felt, he made the same answer with an expression of vindictive
reproachfulness, "I’m suﬀering horribly, intolerably!"
e sick man was suﬀering more and more, especially from bedsores, which
it was impossible now to remedy, and grew more and more angry with everyone
about him, blaming them for everything, and especially for not having brought
him a doctor from Moscow. Kiy tried in every possible way to relieve him, to
soothe him; but it was all in vain, and Levin saw that she herself was exhausted
both physically and morally, though she would not admit it. e sense of death,
which had been evoked in all by his taking leave of life on the night when he
had sent for his brother, was broken up. Everyone knew that he must inevitably
die soon, that he was half dead already. Everyone wished for nothing but that he
should die as soon as possible, and everyone, concealing this, gave him medicines,
tried to ﬁnd remedies and doctors, and deceived him and themselves and each
other. All this was falsehood, disgusting, irreverent deceit. And owing to the
bent of his character, and because he loved the dying man more than anyone else
did, Levin was most painfully conscious of this deceit.
Levin, who had long been possessed by the idea of reconciling his brothers, at least in face of death, had wrien to his brother, Sergey Ivanovitch, and
having received an answer from him, he read this leer to the sick man. Sergey
Ivanovitch wrote that he could not come himself, and in touching terms he begged
his brother’s forgiveness.

cdliii
e sick man said nothing.
"What am I to write to him?" said Levin. "I hope you are not angry with
him?"
"No, not the least!" Nikolay answered, vexed at the question. "Tell him to
send me a doctor."
ree more days of agony followed; the sick man was still in the same condition. e sense of longing for his death was felt by everyone now at the mere
sight of him, by the waiters and the hotel-keeper and all the people staying in the
hotel, and the doctor and Marya Nikolaevna and Levin and Kiy. e sick man
alone did not express this feeling, but on the contrary was furious at their not
geing him doctors, and went on taking medicine and talking of life. Only at rare
moments, when the opium gave him an instant’s relief from the never-ceasing
pain, he would sometimes, half asleep, uer what was ever more intense in his
heart than in all the others: "Oh, if it were only the end!" or: "When will it be
over?"
His suﬀerings, steadily growing more intense, did their work and prepared
him for death. ere was no position in which he was not in pain, there was not
a minute in which he was unconscious of it, not a limb, not a part of his body
that did not ache and cause him agony. Even the memories, the impressions, the
thoughts of this body awakened in him now the same aversion as the body itself.
e sight of other people, their remarks, his own reminiscences, everything was
for him a source of agony. ose about him felt this, and instinctively did not
allow themselves to move freely, to talk, to express their wishes before him. All
his life was merged in the one feeling of suﬀering and desire to be rid of it.
ere was evidently coming over him that revulsion that would make him
look upon death as the goal of his desires, as happiness. Hitherto each individual
desire, aroused by suﬀering or privation, such as hunger, fatigue, thirst, had been
satisﬁed by some bodily function giving pleasure. But now no physical craving or
suﬀering received relief, and the eﬀort to relieve them only caused fresh suﬀering.
And so all desires were merged in one—the desire to be rid of all his suﬀerings and
their source, the body. But he had no words to express this desire of deliverance,
and so he did not speak of it, and from habit asked for the satisfaction of desires
which could not now be satisﬁed. "Turn me over on the other side," he would say,
and immediately aer he would ask to be turned back again as before. "Give me
some broth. Take away the broth. Talk of something: why are you silent?" And
directly they began to talk he would close his eyes, and would show weariness,
indiﬀerence, and loathing.
On the tenth day from their arrival at the town, Kiy was unwell. She
suﬀered from headache and sickness, and she could not get up all the morning.
e doctor opined that the indisposition arose from fatigue and excitement,

cdliv
and prescribed rest.
Aer dinner, however, Kiy got up and went as usual with her work to the
sick man. He looked at her sternly when she came in, and smiled contemptuously
when she said she had been unwell. at day he was continually blowing his
nose, and groaning piteously.
"How do you feel?" she asked him.
"Worse," he articulated with diﬃculty. "In pain!"
"In pain, where?"
"Everywhere."
"It will be over today, you will see," said Marya Nikolaevna. ough it was
said in a whisper, the sick man, whose hearing Levin had noticed was very keen,
must have heard. Levin said hush to her, and looked round at the sick man. Nikolay had heard; but these words produced no eﬀect on him. His eyes had still the
same intense, reproachful look.
"Why do you think so?" Levin asked her, when she had followed him into
the corridor.
"He has begun picking at himself," said Marya Nikolaevna.
"How do you mean?"
"Like this," she said, tugging at the folds of her woolen skirt. Levin noticed,
indeed, that all that day the patient pulled at himself, as it were, trying to snatch
something away.
Marya Nikolaevna’s prediction came true. Towards night the sick man was
not able to li his hands, and could only gaze before him with the same intensely
concentrated expression in his eyes. Even when his brother or Kiy bent over
him, so that he could see them, he looked just the same. Kiy sent for the priest
to read the prayer for the dying.
While the priest was reading it, the dying man did not show any sign of life;
his eyes were closed. Levin, Kiy, and Marya Nikolaevna stood at the bedside. e
priest had not quite ﬁnished reading the prayer when the dying man stretched,
sighed, and opened his eyes. e priest, on ﬁnishing the prayer, put the cross to
the cold forehead, then slowly returned it to the stand, and aer standing for two
minutes more in silence, he touched the huge, bloodless hand that was turning
cold.
"He is gone," said the priest, and would have moved away; but suddenly
there was a faint stir in the mustaches of the dead man that seemed glued together, and quite distinctly in the hush they heard from the boom of the chest
the sharply deﬁned sounds:
"Not quite … soon."
And a minute later the face brightened, a smile came out under the mustaches, and the women who had gathered round began carefully laying out the

cdlv
corpse.
e sight of his brother, and the nearness of death, revived in Levin that
sense of horror in face of the insoluble enigma, together with the nearness and
inevitability of death, that had come upon him that autumn evening when his
brother had come to him. is feeling was now even stronger than before; even
less than before did he feel capable of apprehending the meaning of death, and its
inevitability rose up before him more terrible than ever. But now, thanks to his
wife’s presence, that feeling did not reduce him to despair. In spite of death, he
felt the need of life and love. He felt that love saved him from despair, and that
this love, under the menace of despair, had become still stronger and purer. e
one mystery of death, still unsolved, had scarcely passed before his eyes, when
another mystery had arisen, as insoluble, urging him to love and to life.
e doctor conﬁrmed his suppositions in regard to Kiy. Her indisposition
was a symptom that she was with child.

Chapter 
From the moment when Alexey Alexandrovitch understood from his interviews
with Betsy and with Stepan Arkadyevitch that all that was expected of him was
to leave his wife in peace, without burdening her with his presence, and that his
wife herself desired this, he felt so distraught that he could come to no decision
of himself; he did not know himself what he wanted now, and puing himself
in the hands of those who were so pleased to interest themselves in his aﬀairs,
he met everything with unqualiﬁed assent. It was only when Anna had le his
house, and the English governess sent to ask him whether she should dine with
him or separately, that for the ﬁrst time he clearly comprehended his position,
and was appalled by it. Most diﬃcult of all in this position was the fact that
he could not in any way connect and reconcile his past with what was now. It
was not the past when he had lived happily with his wife that troubled him. e
transition from that past to a knowledge of his wife’s unfaithfulness he had lived
through miserably already; that state was painful, but he could understand it.
If his wife had then, on declaring to him her unfaithfulness, le him, he would
have been wounded, unhappy, but he would not have been in the hopeless position—incomprehensible to himself—in which he felt himself now. He could not
now reconcile his immediate past, his tenderness, his love for his sick wife, and for
the other man’s child with what was now the case, that is with the fact that, as it
were, in return for all this he now found himself alone, put to shame, a laughingstock, needed by no one, and despised by everyone.
For the ﬁrst two days aer his wife’s departure Alexey Alexandrovitch re-

cdlvi
ceived applicants for assistance and his chief secretary, drove to the commiee,
and went down to dinner in the dining room as usual. Without giving himself
a reason for what he was doing, he strained every nerve of his being for those
two days, simply to preserve an appearance of composure, and even of indiﬀerence. Answering inquiries about the disposition of Anna Arkadyevna’s rooms
and belongings, he had exercised immense self-control to appear like a man in
whose eyes what had occurred was not unforeseen nor out of the ordinary course
of events, and he aained his aim: no one could have detected in him signs of
despair. But on the second day aer her departure, when Korney gave him a
bill from a fashionable draper’s shop, which Anna had forgoen to pay, and announced that the clerk from the shop was waiting, Alexey Alexandrovitch told
him to show the clerk up.
"Excuse me, your excellency, for venturing to trouble you. But if you direct
us to apply to her excellency, would you graciously oblige us with her address?"
Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, as it seemed to the clerk, and all at once,
turning round, he sat down at the table. Leing his head sink into his hands, he
sat for a long while in that position, several times aempted to speak and stopped
short. Korney, perceiving his master’s emotion, asked the clerk to call another
time. Le alone, Alexey Alexandrovitch recognized that he had not the strength
to keep up the line of ﬁrmness and composure any longer. He gave orders for the
carriage that was awaiting him to be taken back, and for no one to be admied,
and he did not go down to dinner.
He felt that he could not endure the weight of universal contempt and exasperation, which he had distinctly seen in the face of the clerk and of Korney, and
of everyone, without exception, whom he had met during those two days. He felt
that he could not turn aside from himself the hatred of men, because that hatred
did not come from his being bad (in that case he could have tried to be beer), but
from his being shamefully and repulsively unhappy. He knew that for this, for the
very fact that his heart was torn with grief, they would be merciless to him. He
felt that men would crush him as dogs strangle a torn dog yelping with pain. He
knew that his sole means of security against people was to hide his wounds from
them, and instinctively he tried to do this for two days, but now he felt incapable
of keeping up the unequal struggle.
His despair was even intensiﬁed by the consciousness that he was uerly
alone in his sorrow. In all Petersburg there was not a human being to whom he
could express what he was feeling, who would feel for him, not as a high oﬃcial,
not as a member of society, but simply as a suﬀering man; indeed he had not such
a one in the whole world.
Alexey Alexandrovitch grew up an orphan. ere were two brothers. ey
did not remember their father, and their mother died when Alexey Alexandrovitch

cdlvii
was ten years old. e property was a small one. eir uncle, Karenin, a government oﬃcial of high standing, at one time a favorite of the late Tsar, had brought
them up.
On completing his high school and university courses with medals, Alexey
Alexandrovitch had, with his uncle’s aid, immediately started in a prominent position in the service, and from that time forward he had devoted himself exclusively
to political ambition. In the high school and the university, and aerwards in the
service, Alexey Alexandrovitch had never formed a close friendship with anyone.
His brother had been the person nearest to his heart, but he had a post in the
Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs, and was always abroad, where he had died shortly
aer Alexey Alexandrovitch’s marriage.
While he was governor of a province, Anna’s aunt, a wealthy provincial
lady, had thrown him—middle-aged as he was, though young for a governor—with
her niece, and had succeeded in puing him in such a position that he had either
to declare himself or to leave the town. Alexey Alexandrovitch was not long in
hesitation. ere were at the time as many reasons for the step as against it,
and there was no overbalancing consideration to outweigh his invariable rule of
abstaining when in doubt. But Anna’s aunt had through a common acquaintance
insinuated that he had already compromised the girl, and that he was in honor
bound to make her an oﬀer. He made the oﬀer, and concentrated on his betrothed
and his wife all the feeling of which he was capable.
e aachment he felt to Anna precluded in his heart every need of intimate relations with others. And now among all his acquaintances he had not
one friend. He had plenty of so-called connections, but no friendships. Alexey
Alexandrovitch had plenty of people whom he could invite to dinner, to whose
sympathy he could appeal in any public aﬀair he was concerned about, whose
interest he could reckon upon for anyone he wished to help, with whom he could
candidly discuss other people’s business and aﬀairs of state. But his relations with
these people were conﬁned to one clearly deﬁned channel, and had a certain routine from which it was impossible to depart. ere was one man, a comrade of his
at the university, with whom he had made friends later, and with whom he could
have spoken of a personal sorrow; but this friend had a post in the Department
of Education in a remote part of Russia. Of the people in Petersburg the most
intimate and most possible were his chief secretary and his doctor.
Mihail Vassilievitch Sludin, the chief secretary, was a straightforward, intelligent, good-hearted, and conscientious man, and Alexey Alexandrovitch was
aware of his personal goodwill. But their ﬁve years of oﬃcial work together
seemed to have put a barrier between them that cut oﬀ warmer relations.
Aer signing the papers brought him, Alexey Alexandrovitch had sat for
a long while in silence, glancing at Mihail Vassilievitch, and several times he at-

cdlviii
tempted to speak, but could not. He had already prepared the phrase: "You have
heard of my trouble?" But he ended by saying, as usual: "So you’ll get this ready
for me?" and with that dismissed him.
e other person was the doctor, who had also a kindly feeling for him;
but there had long existed a taciturn understanding between them that both were
weighed down by work, and always in a hurry.
Of his women friends, foremost amongst them Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
Alexey Alexandrovitch never thought. All women, simply as women, were terrible and distasteful to him.

Chapter 
Alexey Alexandrovitch had forgoen the Countess Lidia Ivanovna, but she had
not forgoen him. At the bierest moment of his lonely despair she came to him,
and without waiting to be announced, walked straight into his study. She found
him as he was siing with his head in both hands.
"J’ai forcé la consigne," she said, walking in with rapid steps and breathing hard with excitement and rapid exercise. "I have heard all! Alexey Alexandrovitch! Dear friend!" she went on, warmly squeezing his hand in both of hers
and gazing with her ﬁne pensive eyes into his.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, frowning, got up, and disengaging his hand, moved
her a chair.
"Won’t you sit down, countess? I’m seeing no one because I’m unwell,
countess," he said, and his lips twitched.
"Dear friend!" repeated Countess Lidia Ivanovna, never taking her eyes oﬀ
his, and suddenly her eyebrows rose at the inner corners, describing a triangle on
her forehead, her ugly yellow face became still uglier, but Alexey Alexandrovitch
felt that she was sorry for him and was preparing to cry. And he too was soened;
he snatched her plump hand and proceeded to kiss it.
"Dear friend!" she said in a voice breaking with emotion. "You ought not to
give way to grief. Your sorrow is a great one, but you ought to ﬁnd consolation."
"I am crushed, I am annihilated, I am no longer a man!" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, leing go her hand, but still gazing into her brimming eyes. "My position is so awful because I can ﬁnd nowhere, I cannot ﬁnd within me strength to
support me."
"You will ﬁnd support; seek it—not in me, though I beseech you to believe
in my friendship," she said, with a sigh. "Our support is love, that love that He
has vouchsafed us. His burden is light," she said, with the look of ecstasy Alexey
Alexandrovitch knew so well. "He will be your support and your succor."

cdlix
Although there was in these words a ﬂavor of that sentimental emotion
at her own loy feelings, and that new mystical fervor which had lately gained
ground in Petersburg, and which seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch disproportionate, still it was pleasant to him to hear this now.
"I am weak. I am crushed. I foresaw nothing, and now I understand nothing."
"Dear friend," repeated Lidia Ivanovna.
"It’s not the loss of what I have not now, it’s not that!" pursued Alexey
Alexandrovitch. "I do not grieve for that. But I cannot help feeling humiliated
before other people for the position I am placed in. It is wrong, but I can’t help it,
I can’t help it."
"Not you it was performed that noble act of forgiveness, at which I was
moved to ecstasy, and everyone else too, but He, working within your heart,"
said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, raising her eyes rapturously, "and so you cannot be
ashamed of your act."
Alexey Alexandrovitch knied his brows, and crooking his hands, he
cracked his ﬁngers.
"One must know all the facts," he said in his thin voice. "A man’s strength
has its limits, countess, and I have reached my limits. e whole day I have had
to be making arrangements, arrangements about household maers arising" (he
emphasized the word arising) "from my new, solitary position. e servants, the
governess, the accounts…. ese pinpricks have stabbed me to the heart, and I
have not the strength to bear it. At dinner … yesterday, I was almost geing up
from the dinner table. I could not bear the way my son looked at me. He did not
ask me the meaning of it all, but he wanted to ask, and I could not bear the look in
his eyes. He was afraid to look at me, but that is not all…." Alexey Alexandrovitch
would have referred to the bill that had been brought him, but his voice shook,
and he stopped. at bill on blue paper, for a hat and ribbons, he could not recall
without a rush of self-pity.
"I understand, dear friend," said Lidia Ivanovna. "I understand it all. Succor
and comfort you will ﬁnd not in me, though I have come only to aid you if I can.
If I could take from oﬀ you all these pey, humiliating cares … I understand that a
woman’s word, a woman’s superintendence is needed. You will intrust it to me?"
Silently and gratefully Alexey Alexandrovitch pressed her hand.
"Together we will take care of Seryozha. Practical aﬀairs are not my strong
point. But I will set to work. I will be your housekeeper. Don’t thank me. I do it
not from myself…"
"I cannot help thanking you."
"But, dear friend, do not give way to the feeling of which you spoke—being
ashamed of what is the Christian’s highest glory: he who humbles himself shall be
exalted. And you cannot thank me. You must thank Him, and pray to Him for

cdlx
succor. In Him alone we ﬁnd peace, consolation, salvation, and love," she said,
and turning her eyes heavenwards, she began praying, as Alexey Alexandrovitch
gathered from her silence.
Alexey Alexandrovitch listened to her now, and those expressions which
had seemed to him, if not distasteful, at least exaggerated, now seemed to him
natural and consolatory. Alexey Alexandrovitch had disliked this new enthusiastic fervor. He was a believer, who was interested in religion primarily in its
political aspect, and the new doctrine which ventured upon several new interpretations, just because it paved the way to discussion and analysis, was in principle
disagreeable to him. He had hitherto taken up a cold and even antagonistic attitude to this new doctrine, and with Countess Lidia Ivanovna, who had been
carried away by it, he had never argued, but by silence had assiduously parried
her aempts to provoke him into argument. Now for the ﬁrst time he heard her
words with pleasure, and did not inwardly oppose them.
"I am very, very grateful to you, both for your deeds and for your words,"
he said, when she had ﬁnished praying.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna once more pressed both her friend’s hands.
"Now I will enter upon my duties," she said with a smile aer a pause, as
she wiped away the traces of tears. "I am going to Seryozha. Only in the last
extremity shall I apply to you." And she got up and went out.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna went into Seryozha’s part of the house, and dropping tears on the scared child’s cheeks, she told him that his father was a saint
and his mother was dead.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna kept her promise. She did actually take upon herself the care of the organization and management of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s
household. But she had not overstated the case when saying that practical affairs were not her strong point. All her arrangements had to be modiﬁed because they could not be carried out, and they were modiﬁed by Korney, Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s valet, who, though no one was aware of the fact, now managed
Karenin’s household, and quietly and discreetly reported to his master while he
was dressing all it was necessary for him to know. But Lidia Ivanovna’s help
was none the less real; she gave Alexey Alexandrovitch moral support in the consciousness of her love and respect for him, and still more, as it was soothing to
her to believe, in that she almost turned him to Christianity—that is, from an
indiﬀerent and apathetic believer she turned him into an ardent and steadfast adherent of the new interpretation of Christian doctrine, which had been gaining
ground of late in Petersburg. It was easy for Alexey Alexandrovitch to believe
in this teaching. Alexey Alexandrovitch, like Lidia Ivanovna indeed, and others
who shared their views, was completely devoid of vividness of imagination, that
spiritual faculty in virtue of which the conceptions evoked by the imagination

cdlxi
become so vivid that they must needs be in harmony with other conceptions, and
with actual fact. He saw nothing impossible and inconceivable in the idea that
death, though existing for unbelievers, did not exist for him, and that, as he was
possessed of the most perfect faith, of the measure of which he was himself the
judge, therefore there was no sin in his soul, and he was experiencing complete
salvation here on earth.
It is true that the erroneousness and shallowness of this conception of his
faith was dimly perceptible to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and he knew that when,
without the slightest idea that his forgiveness was the action of a higher power, he
had surrendered directly to the feeling of forgiveness, he had felt more happiness
than now when he was thinking every instant that Christ was in his heart, and that
in signing oﬃcial papers he was doing His will. But for Alexey Alexandrovitch
it was a necessity to think in that way; it was such a necessity for him in his
humiliation to have some elevated standpoint, however imaginary, from which,
looked down upon by all, he could look down on others, that he clung, as to his
one salvation, to his delusion of salvation.

Chapter 
e Countess Lidia Ivanovna had, as a very young and sentimental girl, been
married to a wealthy man of high rank, an extremely good-natured, jovial, and
extremely dissipated rake. Two months aer marriage her husband abandoned
her, and her impassioned protestations of aﬀection he met with a sarcasm and
even hostility that people knowing the count’s good heart, and seeing no defects
in the sentimental Lidia, were at a loss to explain. ough they were divorced and
lived apart, yet whenever the husband met the wife, he invariably behaved to her
with the same malignant irony, the cause of which was incomprehensible.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna had long given up being in love with her husband,
but from that time she had never given up being in love with someone. She was in
love with several people at once, both men and women; she had been in love with
almost everyone who had been particularly distinguished in any way. She was in
love with all the new princes and princesses who married into the imperial family; she had been in love with a high dignitary of the Church, a vicar, and a parish
priest; she had been in love with a journalist, three Slavophiles, with Komissarov,
with a minister, a doctor, an English missionary and Karenin. All these passions
constantly waning or growing more ardent, did not prevent her from keeping up
the most extended and complicated relations with the court and fashionable society. But from the time that aer Karenin’s trouble she took him under her special
protection, from the time that she set to work in Karenin’s household looking

cdlxii
aer his welfare, she felt that all her other aachments were not the real thing,
and that she was now genuinely in love, and with no one but Karenin. e feeling she now experienced for him seemed to her stronger than any of her former
feelings. Analyzing her feeling, and comparing it with former passions, she distinctly perceived that she would not have been in love with Komissarov if he had
not saved the life of the Tsar, that she would not have been in love with RistitchKudzhitsky if there had been no Slavonic question, but that she loved Karenin for
himself, for his loy, uncomprehended soul, for the sweet—to her—high notes of
his voice, for his drawling intonation, his weary eyes, his character, and his so
white hands with their swollen veins. She was not simply overjoyed at meeting
him, but she sought in his face signs of the impression she was making on him.
She tried to please him, not by her words only, but in her whole person. For his
sake it was that she now lavished more care on her dress than before. She caught
herself in reveries on what might have been, if she had not been married and he
had been free. She blushed with emotion when he came into the room, she could
not repress a smile of rapture when he said anything amiable to her.
For several days now Countess Lidia Ivanovna had been in a state of intense
excitement. She had learned that Anna and Vronsky were in Petersburg. Alexey
Alexandrovitch must be saved from seeing her, he must be saved even from the
torturing knowledge that that awful woman was in the same town with him, and
that he might meet her any minute.
Lidia Ivanovna made inquiries through her friends as to what those infamous people, as she called Anna and Vronsky, intended doing, and she endeavored
so to guide every movement of her friend during those days that he could not come
across them. e young adjutant, an acquaintance of Vronsky, through whom she
obtained her information, and who hoped through Countess Lidia Ivanovna to obtain a concession, told her that they had ﬁnished their business and were going
away next day. Lidia Ivanovna had already begun to calm down, when the next
morning a note was brought her, the handwriting of which she recognized with
horror. It was the handwriting of Anna Karenina. e envelope was of paper as
thick as bark; on the oblong yellow paper there was a huge monogram, and the
leer smelt of agreeable scent.
"Who brought it?"
"A commissionaire from the hotel."
It was some time before Countess Lidia Ivanovna could sit down to read the
leer. Her excitement brought on an aack of asthma, to which she was subject.
When she had recovered her composure, she read the following leer in French:
"Madame la Comtesse,
"e Christian feelings with which your heart is ﬁlled give me

cdlxiii
the, I feel, unpardonable boldness to write to you. I am miserable at
being separated from my son. I entreat permission to see him once
before my departure. Forgive me for recalling myself to your memory.
I apply to you and not to Alexey Alexandrovitch, simply because I do
not wish to cause that generous man to suﬀer in remembering me.
Knowing your friendship for him, I know you will understand me.
Could you send Seryozha to me, or should I come to the house at
some ﬁxed hour, or will you let me know when and where I could
see him away from home? I do not anticipate a refusal, knowing the
magnanimity of him with whom it rests. You cannot conceive the
craving I have to see him, and so cannot conceive the gratitude your
help will arouse in me.
Anna"
Everything in this leer exasperated Countess Lidia Ivanovna: its contents and
the allusion to magnanimity, and especially its free and easy—as she considered—tone.
"Say that there is no answer," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, and immediately
opening her bloing-book, she wrote to Alexey Alexandrovitch that she hoped to
see him at one o’clock at the levee.
"I must talk with you of a grave and painful subject. ere we will arrange
where to meet. Best of all at my house, where I will order tea as you like it. Urgent. He lays the cross, but He gives the strength to bear it," she added, so as to
give him some slight preparation. Countess Lidia Ivanovna usually wrote some
two or three leers a day to Alexey Alexandrovitch. She enjoyed that form of
communication, which gave opportunity for a reﬁnement and air of mystery not
aﬀorded by their personal interviews.

Chapter 
e levee was drawing to a close. People met as they were going away, and gossiped of the latest news, of the newly bestowed honors and the changes in the
positions of the higher functionaries.
"If only Countess Marya Borissovna were Minister of War, and Princess
Vatkovskaya were Commander-in-Chief," said a gray-headed, lile old man in a
gold-embroidered uniform, addressing a tall, handsome maid of honor who had
questioned him about the new appointments.
"And me among the adjutants," said the maid of honor, smiling.
"You have an appointment already. You’re over the ecclesiastical depart-

cdlxiv
ment. And your assistant’s Karenin."
"Good-day, prince!" said the lile old man to a man who came up to him.
"What were you saying of Karenin?" said the prince.
"He and Putyatov have received the Alexander Nevsky."
"I thought he had it already."
"No. Just look at him," said the lile old man, pointing with his embroidered
hat to Karenin in a court uniform with the new red ribbon across his shoulders,
standing in the doorway of the hall with an inﬂuential member of the Imperial
Council. "Pleased and happy as a brass farthing," he added, stopping to shake
hands with a handsome gentleman of the bedchamber of colossal proportions.
"No; he’s looking older," said the gentleman of the bedchamber.
"From overwork. He’s always drawing up projects nowadays. He won’t let
a poor devil go nowadays till he’s explained it all to him under heads."
"Looking older, did you say? Il fait des passions. I believe Countess Lidia
Ivanovna’s jealous now of his wife."
"Oh, come now, please don’t say any harm of Countess Lidia Ivanovna."
"Why, is there any harm in her being in love with Karenin?"
"But is it true Madame Karenina’s here?"
"Well, not here in the palace, but in Petersburg. I met her yesterday with
Alexey Vronsky, bras dessous, bras dessous, in the Morsky."
"C’est un homme qui n’a pas…" the gentleman of the bedchamber was beginning, but he stopped to make room, bowing, for a member of the Imperial family
to pass.
us people talked incessantly of Alexey Alexandrovitch, ﬁnding fault with
him and laughing at him, while he, blocking up the way of the member of the
Imperial Council he had captured, was explaining to him point by point his new
ﬁnancial project, never interrupting his discourse for an instant for fear he should
escape.
Almost at the same time that his wife le Alexey Alexandrovitch there had
come to him that bierest moment in the life of an oﬃcial—the moment when
his upward career comes to a full stop. is full stop had arrived and everyone
perceived it, but Alexey Alexandrovitch himself was not yet aware that his career
was over. Whether it was due to his feud with Stremov, or his misfortune with
his wife, or simply that Alexey Alexandrovitch had reached his destined limits,
it had become evident to everyone in the course of that year that his career was
at an end. He still ﬁlled a position of consequence, he sat on many commissions
and commiees, but he was a man whose day was over, and from whom nothing
was expected. Whatever he said, whatever he proposed, was heard as though
it were something long familiar, and the very thing that was not needed. But
Alexey Alexandrovitch was not aware of this, and, on the contrary, being cut oﬀ

cdlxv
from direct participation in governmental activity, he saw more clearly than ever
the errors and defects in the action of others, and thought it his duty to point out
means for their correction. Shortly aer his separation from his wife, he began
writing his ﬁrst note on the new judicial procedure, the ﬁrst of the endless series
of notes he was destined to write in the future.
Alexey Alexandrovitch did not merely fail to observe his hopeless position
in the oﬃcial world, he was not merely free from anxiety on this head, he was
positively more satisﬁed than ever with his own activity.
"He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how
he may please the Lord: But he that is married careth for the things that are
of the world, how he may please his wife," says the Apostle Paul, and Alexey
Alexandrovitch, who was now guided in every action by Scripture, oen recalled
this text. It seemed to him that ever since he had been le without a wife, he
had in these very projects of reform been serving the Lord more zealously than
before.
e unmistakable impatience of the member of the Council trying to get
away from him did not trouble Alexey Alexandrovitch; he gave up his exposition
only when the member of the Council, seizing his chance when one of the Imperial
family was passing, slipped away from him.
Le alone, Alexey Alexandrovitch looked down, collecting his thoughts,
then looked casually about him and walked towards the door, where he hoped to
meet Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
"And how strong they all are, how sound physically," thought Alexey
Alexandrovitch, looking at the powerfully built gentleman of the bedchamber
with his well-combed, perfumed whiskers, and at the red neck of the prince,
pinched by his tight uniform. He had to pass them on his way. "Truly is it said
that all the world is evil," he thought, with another sidelong glance at the calves
of the gentleman of the bedchamber.
Moving forward deliberately, Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed with his customary air of weariness and dignity to the gentleman who had been talking about
him, and looking towards the door, his eyes sought Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
"Ah! Alexey Alexandrovitch!" said the lile old man, with a malicious light
in his eyes, at the moment when Karenin was on a level with them, and was
nodding with a frigid gesture, "I haven’t congratulated you yet," said the old man,
pointing to his newly received ribbon.
"ank you," answered Alexey Alexandrovitch. "What an exquisite day today," he added, laying emphasis in his peculiar way on the word exquisite.
at they laughed at him he was well aware, but he did not expect anything
but hostility from them; he was used to that by now.
Catching sight of the yellow shoulders of Lidia Ivanovna juing out above

cdlxvi
her corset, and her ﬁne pensive eyes bidding him to her, Alexey Alexandrovitch
smiled, revealing untarnished white teeth, and went towards her.
Lidia Ivanovna’s dress had cost her great pains, as indeed all her dresses had
done of late. Her aim in dress was now quite the reverse of that she had pursued
thirty years before. en her desire had been to adorn herself with something,
and the more adorned the beer. Now, on the contrary, she was perforce decked
out in a way so inconsistent with her age and her ﬁgure, that her one anxiety
was to contrive that the contrast between these adornments and her own exterior
should not be too appalling. And as far as Alexey Alexandrovitch was concerned
she succeeded, and was in his eyes aractive. For him she was the one island not
only of goodwill to him, but of love in the midst of the sea of hostility and jeering
that surrounded him.
Passing through rows of ironical eyes, he was drawn as naturally to her
loving glance as a plant to the sun.
"I congratulate you," she said to him, her eyes on his ribbon.
Suppressing a smile of pleasure, he shrugged his shoulders, closing his eyes,
as though to say that that could not be a source of joy to him. Countess Lidia
Ivanovna was very well aware that it was one of his chief sources of satisfaction,
though he never admied it.
"How is our angel?" said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, meaning Seryozha.
"I can’t say I was quite pleased with him," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, raising his eyebrows and opening his eyes. "And Sitnikov is not satisﬁed with him."
(Sitnikov was the tutor to whom Seryozha’s secular education had been intrusted.)
"As I have mentioned to you, there’s a sort of coldness in him towards the most important questions which ought to touch the heart of every man and every child…."
Alexey Alexandrovitch began expounding his views on the sole question that interested him besides the service—the education of his son.
When Alexey Alexandrovitch with Lidia Ivanovna’s help had been brought
back anew to life and activity, he felt it his duty to undertake the education of
the son le on his hands. Having never before taken any interest in educational
questions, Alexey Alexandrovitch devoted some time to the theoretical study of
the subject. Aer reading several books on anthropology, education, and didactics, Alexey Alexandrovitch drew up a plan of education, and engaging the best
tutor in Petersburg to superintend it, he set to work, and the subject continually
absorbed him.
"Yes, but the heart. I see in him his father’s heart, and with such a heart a
child cannot go far wrong," said Lidia Ivanovna with enthusiasm.
"Yes, perhaps…. As for me, I do my duty. It’s all I can do."
"You’re coming to me," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, aer a pause; "we have
to speak of a subject painful for you. I would give anything to have spared you

cdlxvii
certain memories, but others are not of the same mind. I have received a leer
from her. She is here in Petersburg."
Alexey Alexandrovitch shuddered at the allusion to his wife, but immediately his face assumed the deathlike rigidity which expressed uer helplessness
in the maer.
"I was expecting it," he said.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna looked at him ecstatically, and tears of rapture at
the greatness of his soul came into her eyes.

Chapter 
When Alexey Alexandrovitch came into the Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s snug lile
boudoir, decorated with old china and hung with portraits, the lady herself had
not yet made her appearance.
She was changing her dress.
A cloth was laid on a round table, and on it stood a china tea service and a
silver spirit-lamp and tea kele. Alexey Alexandrovitch looked idly about at the
endless familiar portraits which adorned the room, and siing down to the table,
he opened a New Testament lying upon it. e rustle of the countess’s silk skirt
drew his aention oﬀ.
"Well now, we can sit quietly," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, slipping hurriedly with an agitated smile between the table and the sofa, "and talk over our
tea."
Aer some words of preparation, Countess Lidia Ivanovna, breathing hard
and ﬂushing crimson, gave into Alexey Alexandrovitch’s hands the leer she had
received.
Aer reading the leer, he sat a long while in silence.
"I don’t think I have the right to refuse her," he said, timidly liing his eyes.
"Dear friend, you never see evil in anyone!"
"On the contrary, I see that all is evil. But whether it is just…"
His face showed irresolution, and a seeking for counsel, support, and guidance in a maer he did not understand.
"No," Countess Lidia Ivanovna interrupted him; "there are limits to everything. I can understand immorality," she said, not quite truthfully, since she never
could understand that which leads women to immorality; "but I don’t understand
cruelty: to whom? to you! How can she stay in the town where you are? No,
the longer one lives the more one learns. And I’m learning to understand your
loiness and her baseness."
"Who is to throw a stone?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, unmistakably

cdlxviii
pleased with the part he had to play. "I have forgiven all, and so I cannot deprive her of what is exacted by love in her—by her love for her son…."
"But is that love, my friend? Is it sincere? Admiing that you have forgiven—that you forgive—have we the right to work on the feelings of that angel?
He looks on her as dead. He prays for her, and beseeches God to have mercy on
her sins. And it is beer so. But now what will he think?"
"I had not thought of that," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, evidently agreeing.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna hid her face in her hands and was silent. She was
praying.
"If you ask my advice," she said, having ﬁnished her prayer and uncovered
her face, "I do not advise you to do this. Do you suppose I don’t see how you are
suﬀering, how this has torn open your wounds? But supposing that, as always,
you don’t think of yourself, what can it lead to?—to fresh suﬀering for you, to
torture for the child. If there were a trace of humanity le in her, she ought not
to wish for it herself. No, I have no hesitation in saying I advise not, and if you
will intrust it to me, I will write to her."
And Alexey Alexandrovitch consented, and Countess Lidia Ivanovna sent
the following leer in French:
"Dear Madame,
"To be reminded of you might have results for your son in leading to questions on his part which could not be answered without
implanting in the child’s soul a spirit of censure towards what should
be for him sacred, and therefore I beg you to interpret your husband’s
refusal in the spirit of Christian love. I pray to Almighty God to have
mercy on you.
Countess Lidia"
is leer aained the secret object which Countess Lidia Ivanovna had concealed
from herself. It wounded Anna to the quick.
For his part, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on returning home from Lidia
Ivanovna’s, could not all that day concentrate himself on his usual pursuits, and
ﬁnd that spiritual peace of one saved and believing which he had felt of late.
e thought of his wife, who had so greatly sinned against him, and towards
whom he had been so saintly, as Countess Lidia Ivanovna had so justly told him,
ought not to have troubled him; but he was not easy; he could not understand
the book he was reading; he could not drive away harassing recollections of his
relations with her, of the mistake which, as it now seemed, he had made in regard
to her. e memory of how he had received her confession of inﬁdelity on their
way home from the races (especially that he had insisted only on the observance

cdlxix
of external decorum, and had not sent a challenge) tortured him like a remorse.
He was tortured too by the thought of the leer he had wrien her; and most of
all, his forgiveness, which nobody wanted, and his care of the other man’s child
made his heart burn with shame and remorse.
And just the same feeling of shame and regret he felt now, as he reviewed
all his past with her, recalling the awkward words in which, aer long wavering,
he had made her an oﬀer.
"But how have I been to blame?" he said to himself. And this question always excited another question in him—whether they felt diﬀerently, did their
loving and marrying diﬀerently, these Vronskys and Oblonskys … these gentlemen of the bedchamber, with their ﬁne calves. And there passed before his mind
a whole series of these melesome, vigorous, self-conﬁdent men, who always and
everywhere drew his inquisitive aention in spite of himself. He tried to dispel
these thoughts, he tried to persuade himself that he was not living for this transient life, but for the life of eternity, and that there was peace and love in his
heart.
But the fact that he had in this transient, trivial life made, as it seemed to
him, a few trivial mistakes tortured him as though the eternal salvation in which
he believed had no existence. But this temptation did not last long, and soon there
was reestablished once more in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s soul the peace and the
elevation by virtue of which he could forget what he did not want to remember.

Chapter 
"Well, Kapitonitch?" said Seryozha, coming back rosy and good-humored from
his walk the day before his birthday, and giving his overcoat to the tall old hall
porter, who smiled down at the lile person from the height of his long ﬁgure.
"Well, has the bandaged clerk been here today? Did papa see him?"
"He saw him. e minute the chief secretary came out, I announced him,"
said the hall porter with a good-humored wink. "Here, I’ll take it oﬀ."
"Seryozha!" said the tutor, stopping in the doorway leading to the inner
rooms. "Take it oﬀ yourself." But Seryozha, though he heard his tutor’s feeble
voice, did not pay aention to it. He stood keeping hold of the hall porter’s belt,
and gazing into his face.
"Well, and did papa do what he wanted for him?"
e hall porter nodded his head aﬃrmatively. e clerk with his face tied up,
who had already been seven times to ask some favor of Alexey Alexandrovitch,
interested both Seryozha and the hall porter. Seryozha had come upon him in the
hall, and had heard him plaintively beg the hall porter to announce him, saying

cdlxx
that he and his children had death staring them in the face.
Since then Seryozha, having met him a second time in the hall, took great
interest in him.
"Well, was he very glad?" he asked.
"Glad? I should think so! Almost dancing as he walked away."
"And has anything been le?" asked Seryozha, aer a pause.
"Come, sir," said the hall-porter; then with a shake of his head he whispered,
"Something from the countess."
Seryozha understood at once that what the hall porter was speaking of was
a present from Countess Lidia Ivanovna for his birthday.
"What do you say? Where?"
"Korney took it to your papa. A ﬁne plaything it must be too!"
"How big? Like this?"
"Rather small, but a ﬁne thing."
"A book."
"No, a thing. Run along, run along, Vassily Lukitch is calling you," said the
porter, hearing the tutor’s steps approaching, and carefully taking away from his
belt the lile hand in the glove half pulled oﬀ, he signed with his head towards
the tutor.
"Vassily Lukitch, in a tiny minute!" answered Seryozha with that gay and
loving smile which always won over the conscientious Vassily Lukitch.
Seryozha was too happy, everything was too delightful for him to be able
to help sharing with his friend the porter the family good fortune of which he
had heard during his walk in the public gardens from Lidia Ivanovna’s niece. is
piece of good news seemed to him particularly important from its coming at the
same time with the gladness of the bandaged clerk and his own gladness at toys
having come for him. It seemed to Seryozha that this was a day on which everyone
ought to be glad and happy.
"You know papa’s received the Alexander Nevsky today?"
"To be sure I do! People have been already to congratulate him."
"And is he glad?"
"Glad at the Tsar’s gracious favor! I should think so! It’s a proof he’s deserved it," said the porter severely and seriously.
Seryozha fell to dreaming, gazing up at the face of the porter, which he had
thoroughly studied in every detail, especially the chin that hung down between
the gray whiskers, never seen by anyone but Seryozha, who saw him only from
below.
"Well, and has your daughter been to see you lately?"
e porter’s daughter was a ballet dancer.
"When is she to come on week-days? ey’ve their lessons to learn too.

cdlxxi
And you’ve your lesson, sir; run along."
On coming into the room, Seryozha, instead of siing down to his lessons,
told his tutor of his supposition that what had been brought him must be a machine. "What do you think?" he inquired.
But Vassily Lukitch was thinking of nothing but the necessity of learning
the grammar lesson for the teacher, who was coming at two.
"No, do just tell me, Vassily Lukitch," he asked suddenly, when he was seated
at their work table with the book in his hands, "what is greater than the Alexander
Nevsky? You know papa’s received the Alexander Nevsky?"
Vassily Lukitch replied that the Vladimir was greater than the Alexander
Nevsky.
"And higher still?"
"Well, highest of all is the Andrey Pervozvanny."
"And higher than the Andrey?"
"I don’t know."
"What, you don’t know?" and Seryozha, leaning on his elbows, sank into
deep meditation.
His meditations were of the most complex and diverse character. He imagined his father’s having suddenly been presented with both the Vladimir and the
Andrey today, and in consequence being much beer tempered at his lesson, and
dreamed how, when he was grown up, he would himself receive all the orders,
and what they might invent higher than the Andrey. Directly any higher order
were invented, he would win it. ey would make a higher one still, and he would
immediately win that too.
e time passed in such meditations, and when the teacher came, the lesson
about the adverbs of place and time and manner of action was not ready, and the
teacher was not only displeased, but hurt. is touched Seryozha. He felt he
was not to blame for not having learned the lesson; however much he tried, he
was uerly unable to do that. As long as the teacher was explaining to him, he
believed him and seemed to comprehend, but as soon as he was le alone, he
was positively unable to recollect and to understand that the short and familiar
word "suddenly" is an adverb of manner of action. Still he was sorry that he had
disappointed the teacher.
He chose a moment when the teacher was looking in silence at the book.
"Mihail Ivanitch, when is your birthday?" he asked all, of a sudden.
"You’d much beer be thinking about your work. Birthdays are of no importance to a rational being. It’s a day like any other on which one has to do one’s
work."
Seryozha looked intently at the teacher, at his scanty beard, at his spectacles,
which had slipped down below the ridge on his nose, and fell into so deep a reverie

cdlxxii
that he heard nothing of what the teacher was explaining to him. He knew that
the teacher did not think what he said; he felt it from the tone in which it was
said. "But why have they all agreed to speak just in the same manner always the
dreariest and most useless stu? Why does he keep me oﬀ; why doesn’t he love
me?" he asked himself mournfully, and could not think of an answer.

Chapter 
Aer the lesson with the grammar teacher came his father’s lesson. While waiting for his father, Seryozha sat at the table playing with a penknife, and fell to
dreaming. Among Seryozha’s favorite occupations was searching for his mother
during his walks. He did not believe in death generally, and in her death in particular, in spite of what Lidia Ivanovna had told him and his father had conﬁrmed,
and it was just because of that, and aer he had been told she was dead, that he
had begun looking for her when out for a walk. Every woman of full, graceful
ﬁgure with dark hair was his mother. At the sight of such a woman such a feeling
of tenderness was stirred within him that his breath failed him, and tears came
into his eyes. And he was on the tiptoe of expectation that she would come up to
him, would li her veil. All her face would be visible, she would smile, she would
hug him, he would sniﬀ her fragrance, feel the soness of her arms, and cry with
happiness, just as he had one evening lain on her lap while she tickled him, and
he laughed and bit her white, ring-covered ﬁngers. Later, when he accidentally
learned from his old nurse that his mother was not dead, and his father and Lidia
Ivanovna had explained to him that she was dead to him because she was wicked
(which he could not possibly believe, because he loved her), he went on seeking
her and expecting her in the same way. at day in the public gardens there had
been a lady in a lilac veil, whom he had watched with a throbbing heart, believing
it to be she as she came towards them along the path. e lady had not come up
to them, but had disappeared somewhere. at day, more intensely than ever,
Seryozha felt a rush of love for her, and now, waiting for his father, he forgot everything, and cut all round the edge of the table with his penknife, staring straight
before him with sparkling eyes and dreaming of her.
"Here is your papa!" said Vassily Lukitch, rousing him.
Seryozha jumped up and went up to his father, and kissing his hand, looked
at him intently, trying to discover signs of his joy at receiving the Alexander
Nevsky.
"Did you have a nice walk?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, siing down in
his easy chair, pulling the volume of the Old Testament to him and opening it.
Although Alexey Alexandrovitch had more than once told Seryozha that every

cdlxxiii
Christian ought to know Scripture history thoroughly, he oen referred to the
Bible himself during the lesson, and Seryozha observed this.
"Yes, it was very nice indeed, papa," said Seryozha, siing sideways on his
chair and rocking it, which was forbidden. "I saw Nadinka" (Nadinka was a niece
of Lidia Ivanovna’s who was being brought up in her house). "She told me you’d
been given a new star. Are you glad, papa?"
"First of all, don’t rock your chair, please," said Alexey Alexandrovitch. "And
secondly, it’s not the reward that’s precious, but the work itself. And I could have
wished you understood that. If you now are going to work, to study in order to
win a reward, then the work will seem hard to you; but when you work" (Alexey
Alexandrovitch, as he spoke, thought of how he had been sustained by a sense
of duty through the wearisome labor of the morning, consisting of signing one
hundred and eighty papers), "loving your work, you will ﬁnd your reward in it."
Seryozha’s eyes, that had been shining with gaiety and tenderness, grew
dull and dropped before his father’s gaze. is was the same long-familiar tone his
father always took with him, and Seryozha had learned by now to fall in with it.
His father always talked to him—so Seryozha felt—as though he were addressing
some boy of his own imagination, one of those boys that exist in books, uerly
unlike himself. And Seryozha always tried with his father to act being the storybook boy.
"You understand that, I hope?" said his father.
"Yes, papa," answered Seryozha, acting the part of the imaginary boy.
e lesson consisted of learning by heart several verses out of the Gospel
and the repetition of the beginning of the Old Testament. e verses from the
Gospel Seryozha knew fairly well, but at the moment when he was saying them
he became so absorbed in watching the sharply protruding, bony knobbiness of
his father’s forehead, that he lost the thread, and he transposed the end of one
verse and the beginning of another. So it was evident to Alexey Alexandrovitch
that he did not understand what he was saying, and that irritated him.
He frowned, and began explaining what Seryozha had heard many times
before and never could remember, because he understood it too well, just as that
"suddenly" is an adverb of manner of action. Seryozha looked with scared eyes
at his father, and could think of nothing but whether his father would make him
repeat what he had said, as he sometimes did. And this thought so alarmed Seryozha that he now understood nothing. But his father did not make him repeat it,
and passed on to the lesson out of the Old Testament. Seryozha recounted the
events themselves well enough, but when he had to answer questions as to what
certain events preﬁgured, he knew nothing, though he had already been punished
over this lesson. e passage at which he was uerly unable to say anything, and
began ﬁdgeting and cuing the table and swinging his chair, was where he had

cdlxxiv
to repeat the patriarchs before the Flood. He did not know one of them, except
Enoch, who had been taken up alive to heaven. Last time he had remembered
their names, but now he had forgoen them uerly, chieﬂy because Enoch was
the personage he liked best in the whole of the Old Testament, and Enoch’s translation to heaven was connected in his mind with a whole long train of thought, in
which he became absorbed now while he gazed with fascinated eyes at his father’s
watch-chain and a half-unbuoned buon on his waistcoat.
In death, of which they talked to him so oen, Seryozha disbelieved entirely.
He did not believe that those he loved could die, above all that he himself would
die. at was to him something uerly inconceivable and impossible. But he had
been told that all men die; he had asked people, indeed, whom he trusted, and
they too, had conﬁrmed it; his old nurse, too, said the same, though reluctantly.
But Enoch had not died, and so it followed that everyone did not die. "And why
cannot anyone else so serve God and be taken alive to heaven?" thought Seryozha.
Bad people, that is those Seryozha did not like, they might die, but the good might
all be like Enoch.
"Well, what are the names of the patriarchs?"
"Enoch, Enos—"
"But you have said that already. is is bad, Seryozha, very bad. If you
don’t try to learn what is more necessary than anything for a Christian," said his
father, geing up, "whatever can interest you? I am displeased with you, and Piotr
Ignatitch" (this was the most important of his teachers) "is displeased with you….
I shall have to punish you."
His father and his teacher were both displeased with Seryozha, and he certainly did learn his lessons very badly. But still it could not be said he was a stupid
boy. On the contrary, he was far cleverer than the boys his teacher held up as examples to Seryozha. In his father’s opinion, he did not want to learn what he was
taught. In reality he could not learn that. He could not, because the claims of his
own soul were more binding on him than those claims his father and his teacher
made upon him. ose claims were in opposition, and he was in direct conﬂict
with his education. He was nine years old; he was a child; but he knew his own
soul, it was precious to him, he guarded it as the eyelid guards the eye, and without the key of love he let no one into his soul. His teachers complained that he
would not learn, while his soul was brimming over with thirst for knowledge. And
he learned from Kapitonitch, from his nurse, from Nadinka, from Vassily Lukitch,
but not from his teachers. e spring his father and his teachers reckoned upon
to turn their mill-wheels had long dried up at the source, but its waters did their
work in another channel.
His father punished Seryozha by not leing him go to see Nadinka, Lidia
Ivanovna’s niece; but this punishment turned out happily for Seryozha. Vassily

cdlxxv
Lukitch was in a good humor, and showed him how to make windmills. e whole
evening passed over this work and in dreaming how to make a windmill on which
he could turn himself—clutching at the sails or tying himself on and whirling
round. Of his mother Seryozha did not think all the evening, but when he had
gone to bed, he suddenly remembered her, and prayed in his own words that his
mother tomorrow for his birthday might leave oﬀ hiding herself and come to him.
"Vassily Lukitch, do you know what I prayed for tonight extra besides the
regular things?"
"at you might learn your lessons beer?"
"No."
"Toys?"
"No. You’ll never guess. A splendid thing; but it’s a secret! When it comes
to pass I’ll tell you. Can’t you guess!"
"No, I can’t guess. You tell me," said Vassily Lukitch with a smile, which was
rare with him. "Come, lie down, I’m puing out the candle."
"Without the candle I can see beer what I see and what I prayed for. ere!
I was almost telling the secret!" said Seryozha, laughing gaily.
When the candle was taken away, Seryozha heard and felt his mother. She
stood over him, and with loving eyes caressed him. But then came windmills, a
knife, everything began to be mixed up, and he fell asleep.

Chapter 
On arriving in Petersburg, Vronsky and Anna stayed at one of the best hotels;
Vronsky apart in a lower story, Anna above with her child, its nurse, and her
maid, in a large suite of four rooms.
On the day of his arrival Vronsky went to his brother’s. ere he found
his mother, who had come from Moscow on business. His mother and sister-inlaw greeted him as usual: they asked him about his stay abroad, and talked of
their common acquaintances, but did not let drop a single word in allusion to his
connection with Anna. His brother came the next morning to see Vronsky, and of
his own accord asked him about her, and Alexey Vronsky told him directly that he
looked upon his connection with Madame Karenina as marriage; that he hoped
to arrange a divorce, and then to marry her, and until then he considered her as
much a wife as any other wife, and he begged him to tell their mother and his
wife so.
"If the world disapproves, I don’t care," said Vronsky; "but if my relations
want to be on terms of relationship with me, they will have to be on the same
terms with my wife."

cdlxxvi
e elder brother, who had always a respect for his younger brother’s judgment, could not well tell whether he was right or not till the world had decided
the question; for his part he had nothing against it, and with Alexey he went up
to see Anna.
Before his brother, as before everyone, Vronsky addressed Anna with a certain formality, treating her as he might a very intimate friend, but it was understood that his brother knew their real relations, and they talked about Anna’s
going to Vronsky’s estate.
In spite of all his social experience Vronsky was, in consequence of the new
position in which he was placed, laboring under a strange misapprehension. One
would have thought he must have understood that society was closed for him and
Anna; but now some vague ideas had sprung up in his brain that this was only the
case in old-fashioned days, and that now with the rapidity of modern progress (he
had unconsciously become by now a partisan of every sort of progress) the views
of society had changed, and that the question whether they would be received in
society was not a foregone conclusion. "Of course," he thought, "she would not
be received at court, but intimate friends can and must look at it in the proper
light." One may sit for several hours at a stretch with one’s legs crossed in the
same position, if one knows that there’s nothing to prevent one’s changing one’s
position; but if a man knows that he must remain siing so with crossed legs,
then cramps come on, the legs begin to twitch and to strain towards the spot to
which one would like to draw them. is was what Vronsky was experiencing in
regard to the world. ough at the boom of his heart he knew that the world
was shut on them, he put it to the test whether the world had not changed by
now and would not receive them. But he very quickly perceived that though the
world was open for him personally, it was closed for Anna. Just as in the game of
cat and mouse, the hands raised for him were dropped to bar the way for Anna.
One of the ﬁrst ladies of Petersburg society whom Vronsky saw was his
cousin Betsy.
"At last!" she greeted him joyfully. "And Anna? How glad I am! Where
are you stopping? I can fancy aer your delightful travels you must ﬁnd our poor
Petersburg horrid. I can fancy your honeymoon in Rome. How about the divorce?
Is that all over?"
Vronsky noticed that Betsy’s enthusiasm waned when she learned that no
divorce had as yet taken place.
"People will throw stones at me, I know," she said, "but I shall come and see
Anna; yes, I shall certainly come. You won’t be here long, I suppose?"
And she did certainly come to see Anna the same day, but her tone was not
at all the same as in former days. She unmistakably prided herself on her courage,
and wished Anna to appreciate the ﬁdelity of her friendship. She only stayed ten

cdlxxvii
minutes, talking of society gossip, and on leaving she said:
"You’ve never told me when the divorce is to be? Supposing I’m ready to
ﬂing my cap over the mill, other starchy people will give you the cold shoulder
until you’re married. And that’s so simple nowadays. Ça se fait. So you’re going
on Friday? Sorry we shan’t see each other again."
From Betsy’s tone Vronsky might have grasped what he had to expect from
the world; but he made another eﬀort in his own family. His mother he did not
reckon upon. He knew that his mother, who had been so enthusiastic over Anna
at their ﬁrst acquaintance, would have no mercy on her now for having ruined
her son’s career. But he had more hope of Varya, his brother’s wife. He fancied
she would not throw stones, and would go simply and directly to see Anna, and
would receive her in her own house.
e day aer his arrival Vronsky went to her, and ﬁnding her alone, expressed his wishes directly.
"You know, Alexey," she said aer hearing him, "how fond I am of you, and
how ready I am to do anything for you; but I have not spoken, because I knew I
could be of no use to you and to Anna Arkadyevna," she said, articulating the name
"Anna Arkadyevna" with particular care. "Don’t suppose, please, that I judge her.
Never; perhaps in her place I should have done the same. I don’t and can’t enter
into that," she said, glancing timidly at his gloomy face. "But one must call things
by their names. You want me to go and see her, to ask her here, and to rehabilitate
her in society; but do understand that I cannot do so. I have daughters growing up,
and I must live in the world for my husband’s sake. Well, I’m ready to come and
see Anna Arkadyevna: she will understand that I can’t ask her here, or I should
have to do so in such a way that she would not meet people who look at things
diﬀerently; that would oﬀend her. I can’t raise her…"
"Oh, I don’t regard her as fallen more than hundreds of women you do receive!" Vronsky interrupted her still more gloomily, and he got up in silence, understanding that his sister-in-law’s decision was not to be shaken.
"Alexey! don’t be angry with me. Please understand that I’m not to blame,"
began Varya, looking at him with a timid smile.
"I’m not angry with you," he said still as gloomily; "but I’m sorry in two
ways. I’m sorry, too, that this means breaking up our friendship—if not breaking up, at least weakening it. You will understand that for me, too, it cannot be
otherwise."
And with that he le her.
Vronsky knew that further eﬀorts were useless, and that he had to spend
these few days in Petersburg as though in a strange town, avoiding every sort of
relation with his own old circle in order not to be exposed to the annoyances and
humiliations which were so intolerable to him. One of the most unpleasant fea-

cdlxxviii
tures of his position in Petersburg was that Alexey Alexandrovitch and his name
seemed to meet him everywhere. He could not begin to talk of anything without
the conversation turning on Alexey Alexandrovitch; he could not go anywhere
without risk of meeting him. So at least it seemed to Vronsky, just as it seems to
a man with a sore ﬁnger that he is continually, as though on purpose, grazing his
sore ﬁnger on everything.
eir stay in Petersburg was the more painful to Vronsky that he perceived
all the time a sort of new mood that he could not understand in Anna. At one
time she would seem in love with him, and then she would become cold, irritable, and impenetrable. She was worrying over something, and keeping something
back from him, and did not seem to notice the humiliations which poisoned his
existence, and for her, with her delicate intuition, must have been still more unbearable.

Chapter 
One of Anna’s objects in coming back to Russia had been to see her son. From
the day she le Italy the thought of it had never ceased to agitate her. And as she
got nearer to Petersburg, the delight and importance of this meeting grew ever
greater in her imagination. She did not even put to herself the question how to
arrange it. It seemed to her natural and simple to see her son when she should
be in the same town with him. But on her arrival in Petersburg she was suddenly
made distinctly aware of her present position in society, and she grasped the fact
that to arrange this meeting was no easy maer.
She had now been two days in Petersburg. e thought of her son never le
her for a single instant, but she had not yet seen him. To go straight to the house,
where she might meet Alexey Alexandrovitch, that she felt she had no right to do.
She might be refused admiance and insulted. To write and so enter into relations
with her husband—that it made her miserable to think of doing; she could only
be at peace when she did not think of her husband. To get a glimpse of her son
out walking, ﬁnding out where and when he went out, was not enough for her;
she had so looked forward to this meeting, she had so much she must say to him,
she so longed to embrace him, to kiss him. Seryozha’s old nurse might be a help
to her and show her what to do. But the nurse was not now living in Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s house. In this uncertainty, and in eﬀorts to ﬁnd the nurse, two
days had slipped by.
Hearing of the close intimacy between Alexey Alexandrovitch and Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, Anna decided on the third day to write to her a leer, which cost
her great pains, and in which she intentionally said that permission to see her son

cdlxxix
must depend on her husband’s generosity. She knew that if the leer were shown
to her husband, he would keep up his character of magnanimity, and would not
refuse her request.
e commissionaire who took the leer had brought her back the most cruel
and unexpected answer, that there was no answer. She had never felt so humiliated as at the moment when, sending for the commissionaire, she heard from
him the exact account of how he had waited, and how aerwards he had been
told there was no answer. Anna felt humiliated, insulted, but she saw that from
her point of view Countess Lidia Ivanovna was right. Her suﬀering was the more
poignant that she had to bear it in solitude. She could not and would not share
it with Vronsky. She knew that to him, although he was the primary cause of
her distress, the question of her seeing her son would seem a maer of very lile
consequence. She knew that he would never be capable of understanding all the
depth of her suﬀering, that for his cool tone at any allusion to it she would begin
to hate him. And she dreaded that more than anything in the world, and so she
hid from him everything that related to her son. Spending the whole day at home
she considered ways of seeing her son, and had reached a decision to write to
her husband. She was just composing this leer when she was handed the leer
from Lidia Ivanovna. e countess’s silence had subdued and depressed her, but
the leer, all that she read between the lines in it, so exasperated her, this malice
was so revolting beside her passionate, legitimate tenderness for her son, that she
turned against other people and le oﬀ blaming herself.
"is coldness—this pretense of feeling!" she said to herself. "ey must
needs insult me and torture the child, and I am to submit to it! Not on any consideration! She is worse than I am. I don’t lie, anyway." And she decided on the
spot that next day, Seryozha’s birthday, she would go straight to her husband’s
house, bribe or deceive the servants, but at any cost see her son and overturn the
hideous deception with which they were encompassing the unhappy child.
She went to a toy shop, bought toys and thought over a plan of action.
She would go early in the morning at eight o’clock, when Alexey Alexandrovitch
would be certain not to be up. She would have money in her hand to give the hall
porter and the footman, so that they should let her in, and not raising her veil,
she would say that she had come from Seryozha’s godfather to congratulate him,
and that she had been charged to leave the toys at his bedside. She had prepared
everything but the words she should say to her son. Oen as she had dreamed of
it, she could never think of anything.
e next day, at eight o’clock in the morning, Anna got out of a hired sledge
and rang at the front entrance of her former home.
"Run and see what’s wanted. Some lady," said Kapitonitch, who, not yet
dressed, in his overcoat and galoshes, had peeped out of the window and seen a

cdlxxx
lady in a veil standing close up to the door. His assistant, a lad Anna did not know,
had no sooner opened the door to her than she came in, and pulling a three-rouble
note out of her muﬀ put it hurriedly into his hand.
"Seryozha—Sergey Alexeitch," she said, and was going on. Scrutinizing the
note, the porter’s assistant stopped her at the second glass door.
"Whom do you want?" he asked.
She did not hear his words and made no answer.
Noticing the embarrassment of the unknown lady, Kapitonitch went out to
her, opened the second door for her, and asked her what she was pleased to want.
"From Prince Skorodumov for Sergey Alexeitch," she said.
"His honor’s not up yet," said the porter, looking at her aentively.
Anna had not anticipated that the absolutely unchanged hall of the house
where she had lived for nine years would so greatly aﬀect her. Memories sweet
and painful rose one aer another in her heart, and for a moment she forgot what
she was here for.
"Would you kindly wait?" said Kapitonitch, taking oﬀ her fur cloak.
As he took oﬀ the cloak, Kapitonitch glanced at her face, recognized her,
and made her a low bow in silence.
"Please walk in, your excellency," he said to her.
She tried to say something, but her voice refused to uer any sound; with a
guilty and imploring glance at the old man she went with light, swi steps up the
stairs. Bent double, and his galoshes catching in the steps, Kapitonitch ran aer
her, trying to overtake her.
"e tutor’s there; maybe he’s not dressed. I’ll let him know."
Anna still mounted the familiar staircase, not understanding what the old
man was saying.
"is way, to the le, if you please. Excuse its not being tidy. His honor’s in
the old parlor now," the hall porter said, panting. "Excuse me, wait a lile, your
excellency; I’ll just see," he said, and overtaking her, he opened the high door and
disappeared behind it. Anna stood still waiting. "He’s only just awake," said the
hall porter, coming out. And at the very instant the porter said this, Anna caught
the sound of a childish yawn. From the sound of this yawn alone she knew her
son and seemed to see him living before her eyes.
"Let me in; go away!" she said, and went in through the high doorway. On
the right of the door stood a bed, and siing up in the bed was the boy. His lile
body bent forward with his nightshirt unbuoned, he was stretching and still
yawning. e instant his lips came together they curved into a blissfully sleepy
smile, and with that smile he slowly and deliciously rolled back again.
"Seryozha!" she whispered, going noiselessly up to him.
When she was parted from him, and all this laer time when she had been

cdlxxxi
feeling a fresh rush of love for him, she had pictured him as he was at four years
old, when she had loved him most of all. Now he was not even the same as when
she had le him; he was still further from the four-year-old baby, more grown
and thinner. How thin his face was, how short his hair was! What long hands!
How he had changed since she le him! But it was he with his head, his lips, his
so neck and broad lile shoulders.
"Seryozha!" she repeated just in the child’s ear.
He raised himself again on his elbow, turned his tangled head from side
to side as though looking for something, and opened his eyes. Slowly and inquiringly he looked for several seconds at his mother standing motionless before
him, then all at once he smiled a blissful smile, and shuing his eyes, rolled not
backwards but towards her into her arms.
"Seryozha! my darling boy!" she said, breathing hard and puing her arms
round his plump lile body. "Mother!" he said, wriggling about in her arms so as
to touch her hands with diﬀerent parts of him.
Smiling sleepily still with closed eyes, he ﬂung fat lile arms round her
shoulders, rolled towards her, with the delicious sleepy warmth and fragrance
that is only found in children, and began rubbing his face against her neck and
shoulders.
"I know," he said, opening his eyes; "it’s my birthday today. I knew you’d
come. I’ll get up directly."
And saying that he dropped asleep.
Anna looked at him hungrily; she saw how he had grown and changed in
her absence. She knew, and did not know, the bare legs so long now, that were
thrust out below the quilt, those short-cropped curls on his neck in which she had
so oen kissed him. She touched all this and could say nothing; tears choked her.
"What are you crying for, mother?" he said, waking completely up. "Mother,
what are you crying for?" he cried in a tearful voice.
"I won’t cry … I’m crying for joy. It’s so long since I’ve seen you. I won’t,
I won’t," she said, gulping down her tears and turning away. "Come, it’s time for
you to dress now," she added, aer a pause, and, never leing go his hands, she
sat down by his bedside on the chair, where his clothes were put ready for him.
"How do you dress without me? How…" she tried to begin talking simply
and cheerfully, but she could not, and again she turned away.
"I don’t have a cold bath, papa didn’t order it. And you’ve not seen Vassily
Lukitch? He’ll come in soon. Why, you’re siing on my clothes!"
And Seryozha went oﬀ into a peal of laughter. She looked at him and smiled.
"Mother, darling, sweet one!" he shouted, ﬂinging himself on her again and
hugging her. It was as though only now, on seeing her smile, he fully grasped
what had happened.

cdlxxxii
"I don’t want that on," he said, taking oﬀ her hat. And as it were, seeing her
afresh without her hat, he fell to kissing her again.
"But what did you think about me? You didn’t think I was dead?"
"I never believed it."
"You didn’t believe it, my sweet?"
"I knew, I knew!" he repeated his favorite phrase, and snatching the hand
that was stroking his hair, he pressed the open palm to his mouth and kissed it.

Chapter 
Meanwhile Vassily Lukitch had not at ﬁrst understood who this lady was, and
had learned from their conversation that it was no other person than the mother
who had le her husband, and whom he had not seen, as he had entered the
house aer her departure. He was in doubt whether to go in or not, or whether
to communicate with Alexey Alexandrovitch. Reﬂecting ﬁnally that his duty was
to get Seryozha up at the hour ﬁxed, and that it was therefore not his business to
consider who was there, the mother or anyone else, but simply to do his duty, he
ﬁnished dressing, went to the door and opened it.
But the embraces of the mother and child, the sound of their voices, and
what they were saying, made him change his mind.
He shook his head, and with a sigh he closed the door. "I’ll wait another ten
minutes," he said to himself, clearing his throat and wiping away tears.
Among the servants of the household there was intense excitement all this
time. All had heard that their mistress had come, and that Kapitonitch had let her
in, and that she was even now in the nursery, and that their master always went
in person to the nursery at nine o’clock, and every one fully comprehended that
it was impossible for the husband and wife to meet, and that they must prevent it.
Korney, the valet, going down to the hall porter’s room, asked who had let her in,
and how it was he had done so, and ascertaining that Kapitonitch had admied
her and shown her up, he gave the old man a talking-to. e hall porter was
doggedly silent, but when Korney told him he ought to be sent away, Kapitonitch
darted up to him, and waving his hands in Korney’s face, began:
"Oh yes, to be sure you’d not have let her in! Aer ten years’ service, and
never a word but of kindness, and there you’d up and say, ‘Be oﬀ, go along, get
away with you!’ Oh yes, you’re a shrewd one at politics, I dare say! You don’t
need to be taught how to swindle the master, and to ﬁlch fur coats!"
"Soldier!" said Korney contemptuously, and he turned to the nurse who was
coming in. "Here, what do you think, Marya Eﬁmovna: he let her in without a
word to anyone," Korney said addressing her. "Alexey Alexandrovitch will be

cdlxxxiii
down immediately—and go into the nursery!"
"A prey business, a prey business!" said the nurse. "You, Korney Vassilievitch, you’d best keep him some way or other, the master, while I’ll run and
get her away somehow. A prey business!"
When the nurse went into the nursery, Seryozha was telling his mother
how he and Nadinka had had a fall in sledging downhill, and had turned over
three times. She was listening to the sound of his voice, watching his face and
the play of expression on it, touching his hand, but she did not follow what he
was saying. She must go, she must leave him,—this was the only thing she was
thinking and feeling. She heard the steps of Vassily Lukitch coming up to the door
and coughing; she heard, too, the steps of the nurse as she came near; but she sat
like one turned to stone, incapable of beginning to speak or to get up.
"Mistress, darling!" began the nurse, going up to Anna and kissing her hands
and shoulders. "God has brought joy indeed to our boy on his birthday. You aren’t
changed one bit."
"Oh, nurse dear, I didn’t know you were in the house," said Anna, rousing
herself for a moment.
"I’m not living here, I’m living with my daughter. I came for the birthday,
Anna Arkadyevna, darling!"
e nurse suddenly burst into tears, and began kissing her hand again.
Seryozha, with radiant eyes and smiles, holding his mother by one hand
and his nurse by the other, paered on the rug with his fat lile bare feet. e
tenderness shown by his beloved nurse to his mother threw him into an ecstasy.
"Mother! She oen comes to see me, and when she comes…" he was beginning, but he stopped, noticing that the nurse was saying something in a whisper to
his mother, and that in his mother’s face there was a look of dread and something
like shame, which was so strangely unbecoming to her.
She went up to him.
"My sweet!" she said.
She could not say good-bye, but the expression on her face said it, and he
understood. "Darling, darling Kootik!" she used the name by which she had called
him when he was lile, "you won’t forget me? You…" but she could not say more.
How oen aerwards she thought of words she might have said. But now
she did not know how to say it, and could say nothing. But Seryozha knew all
she wanted to say to him. He understood that she was unhappy and loved him.
He understood even what the nurse had whispered. He had caught the words
"always at nine o’clock," and he knew that this was said of his father, and that his
father and mother could not meet. at he understood, but one thing he could not
understand—why there should be a look of dread and shame in her face?… She
was not in fault, but she was afraid of him and ashamed of something. He would

cdlxxxiv
have liked to put a question that would have set at rest this doubt, but he did not
dare; he saw that she was miserable, and he felt for her. Silently he pressed close
to her and whispered, "Don’t go yet. He won’t come just yet."
e mother held him away from her to see what he was thinking, what to
say to him, and in his frightened face she read not only that he was speaking of
his father, but, as it were, asking her what he ought to think about his father.
"Seryozha, my darling," she said, "love him; he’s beer and kinder than I am,
and I have done him wrong. When you grow up you will judge."
"ere’s no one beer than you!…" he cried in despair through his tears,
and, clutching her by the shoulders, he began squeezing her with all his force to
him, his arms trembling with the strain.
"My sweet, my lile one!" said Anna, and she cried as weakly and childishly
as he.
At that moment the door opened. Vassily Lukitch came in.
At the other door there was the sound of steps, and the nurse in a scared
whisper said, "He’s coming," and gave Anna her hat.
Seryozha sank onto the bed and sobbed, hiding his face in his hands. Anna
removed his hands, once more kissed his wet face, and with rapid steps went to
the door. Alexey Alexandrovitch walked in, meeting her. Seeing her, he stopped
short and bowed his head.
Although she had just said he was beer and kinder than she, in the rapid
glance she ﬂung at him, taking in his whole ﬁgure in all its details, feelings of
repulsion and hatred for him and jealousy over her son took possession of her.
With a swi gesture she put down her veil, and, quickening her pace, almost ran
out of the room.
She had not time to undo, and so carried back with her, the parcel of toys
she had chosen the day before in a toy shop with such love and sorrow.

Chapter 
As intensely as Anna had longed to see her son, and long as she had been thinking
of it and preparing herself for it, she had not in the least expected that seeing him
would aﬀect her so deeply. On geing back to her lonely rooms in the hotel she
could not for a long while understand why she was there. "Yes, it’s all over, and I
am again alone," she said to herself, and without taking oﬀ her hat she sat down
in a low chair by the hearth. Fixing her eyes on a bronze clock standing on a table
between the windows, she tried to think.
e French maid brought from abroad came in to suggest she should dress.
She gazed at her wonderingly and said, "Presently." A footman oﬀered her coﬀee.

cdlxxxv
"Later on," she said.
e Italian nurse, aer having taken the baby out in her best, came in with
her, and brought her to Anna. e plump, well-fed lile baby, on seeing her
mother, as she always did, held out her fat lile hands, and with a smile on her
toothless mouth, began, like a ﬁsh with a ﬂoat, bobbing her ﬁngers up and down
the starched folds of her embroidered skirt, making them rustle. It was impossible
not to smile, not to kiss the baby, impossible not to hold out a ﬁnger for her to
clutch, crowing and prancing all over; impossible not to oﬀer her a lip which she
sucked into her lile mouth by way of a kiss. And all this Anna did, and took her
in her arms and made her dance, and kissed her fresh lile cheek and bare lile
elbows; but at the sight of this child it was plainer than ever to her that the feeling she had for her could not be called love in comparison with what she felt for
Seryozha. Everything in this baby was charming, but for some reason all this did
not go deep to her heart. On her ﬁrst child, though the child of an unloved father,
had been concentrated all the love that had never found satisfaction. Her baby
girl had been born in the most painful circumstances and had not had a hundredth
part of the care and thought which had been concentrated on her ﬁrst child. Besides, in the lile girl everything was still in the future, while Seryozha was by
now almost a personality, and a personality dearly loved. In him there was a conﬂict of thought and feeling; he understood her, he loved her, he judged her, she
thought, recalling his words and his eyes. And she was forever—not physically
only but spiritually—divided from him, and it was impossible to set this right.
She gave the baby back to the nurse, let her go, and opened the locket in
which there was Seryozha’s portrait when he was almost of the same age as the
girl. She got up, and, taking oﬀ her hat, took up from a lile table an album in
which there were photographs of her son at diﬀerent ages. She wanted to compare
them, and began taking them out of the album. She took them all out except one,
the latest and best photograph. In it he was in a white smock, siing astride a
chair, with frowning eyes and smiling lips. It was his best, most characteristic
expression. With her lile supple hands, her white, delicate ﬁngers, that moved
with a peculiar intensity today, she pulled at a corner of the photograph, but the
photograph had caught somewhere, and she could not get it out. ere was no
paper knife on the table, and so, pulling out the photograph that was next to her
son’s (it was a photograph of Vronsky taken at Rome in a round hat and with
long hair), she used it to push out her son’s photograph. "Oh, here is he!" she
said, glancing at the portrait of Vronsky, and she suddenly recalled that he was
the cause of her present misery. She had not once thought of him all the morning.
But now, coming all at once upon that manly, noble face, so familiar and so dear
to her, she felt a sudden rush of love for him.
"But where is he? How is it he leaves me alone in my misery?" she thought

cdlxxxvi
all at once with a feeling of reproach, forgeing she had herself kept from him
everything concerning her son. She sent to ask him to come to her immediately;
with a throbbing heart she awaited him, rehearsing to herself the words in which
she would tell him all, and the expressions of love with which he would console
her. e messenger returned with the answer that he had a visitor with him, but
that he would come immediately, and that he asked whether she would let him
bring with him Prince Yashvin, who had just arrived in Petersburg. "He’s not
coming alone, and since dinner yesterday he has not seen me," she thought; "he’s
not coming so that I could tell him everything, but coming with Yashvin." And all
at once a strange idea came to her: what if he had ceased to love her?
And going over the events of the last few days, it seemed to her that she
saw in everything a conﬁrmation of this terrible idea. e fact that he had not
dined at home yesterday, and the fact that he had insisted on their taking separate
sets of rooms in Petersburg, and that even now he was not coming to her alone,
as though he were trying to avoid meeting her face to face.
"But he ought to tell me so. I must know that it is so. If I knew it, then I
know what I should do," she said to herself, uerly unable to picture to herself
the position she would be in if she were convinced of his not caring for her. She
thought he had ceased to love her, she felt close upon despair, and consequently
she felt exceptionally alert. She rang for her maid and went to her dressing room.
As she dressed, she took more care over her appearance than she had done all
those days, as though he might, if he had grown cold to her, fall in love with her
again because she had dressed and arranged her hair in the way most becoming
to her.
She heard the bell ring before she was ready. When she went into the drawing room it was not he, but Yashvin, who met her eyes. Vronsky was looking
through the photographs of her son, which she had forgoen on the table, and he
made no haste to look round at her.
"We have met already," she said, puing her lile hand into the huge hand
of Yashvin, whose bashfulness was so queerly out of keeping with his immense
frame and coarse face. "We met last year at the races. Give them to me," she said,
with a rapid movement snatching from Vronsky the photographs of her son, and
glancing signiﬁcantly at him with ﬂashing eyes. "Were the races good this year?
Instead of them I saw the races in the Corso in Rome. But you don’t care for life
abroad," she said with a cordial smile. "I know you and all your tastes, though I
have seen so lile of you."
"I’m awfully sorry for that, for my tastes are mostly bad," said Yashvin,
gnawing at his le mustache.
Having talked a lile while, and noticing that Vronsky glanced at the clock,
Yashvin asked her whether she would be staying much longer in Petersburg, and

cdlxxxvii
unbending his huge ﬁgure reached aer his cap.
"Not long, I think," she said hesitatingly, glancing at Vronsky.
"So then we shan’t meet again?"
"Come and dine with me," said Anna resolutely, angry it seemed with herself for her embarrassment, but ﬂushing as she always did when she deﬁned her
position before a fresh person. "e dinner here is not good, but at least you will
see him. ere is no one of his old friends in the regiment Alexey cares for as he
does for you."
"Delighted," said Yashvin with a smile, from which Vronsky could see that
he liked Anna very much.
Yashvin said good-bye and went away; Vronsky stayed behind.
"Are you going too?" she said to him.
"I’m late already," he answered. "Run along! I’ll catch you up in a moment,"
he called to Yashvin.
She took him by the hand, and without taking her eyes oﬀ him, gazed at
him while she ransacked her mind for the words to say that would keep him.
"Wait a minute, there’s something I want to say to you," and taking his broad
hand she pressed it on her neck. "Oh, was it right my asking him to dinner?"
"You did quite right," he said with a serene smile that showed his even teeth,
and he kissed her hand.
"Alexey, you have not changed to me?" she said, pressing his hand in both
of hers. "Alexey, I am miserable here. When are we going away?"
"Soon, soon. You wouldn’t believe how disagreeable our way of living here
is to me too," he said, and he drew away his hand.
"Well, go, go!" she said in a tone of oﬀense, and she walked quickly away
from him.

Chapter 
When Vronsky returned home, Anna was not yet home. Soon aer he had le,
some lady, so they told him, had come to see her, and she had gone out with her.
at she had gone out without leaving word where she was going, that she had
not yet come back, and that all the morning she had been going about somewhere
without a word to him—all this, together with the strange look of excitement in
her face in the morning, and the recollection of the hostile tone with which she
had before Yashvin almost snatched her son’s photographs out of his hands, made
him serious. He decided he absolutely must speak openly with her. And he waited
for her in her drawing room. But Anna did not return alone, but brought with her
her old unmarried aunt, Princess Oblonskaya. is was the lady who had come in

cdlxxxviii
the morning, and with whom Anna had gone out shopping. Anna appeared not to
notice Vronsky’s worried and inquiring expression, and began a lively account of
her morning’s shopping. He saw that there was something working within her;
in her ﬂashing eyes, when they rested for a moment on him, there was an intense
concentration, and in her words and movements there was that nervous rapidity
and grace which, during the early period of their intimacy, had so fascinated him,
but which now so disturbed and alarmed him.
e dinner was laid for four. All were gathered together and about to go
into the lile dining room when Tushkevitch made his appearance with a message
from Princess Betsy. Princess Betsy begged her to excuse her not having come to
say good-bye; she had been indisposed, but begged Anna to come to her between
half-past six and nine o’clock. Vronsky glanced at Anna at the precise limit of
time, so suggestive of steps having been taken that she should meet no one; but
Anna appeared not to notice it.
"Very sorry that I can’t come just between half-past six and nine," she said
with a faint smile.
"e princess will be very sorry."
"And so am I."
"You’re going, no doubt, to hear Pai?" said Tushkevitch.
"Pai? You suggest the idea to me. I would go if it were possible to get a
box."
"I can get one," Tushkevitch oﬀered his services.
"I should be very, very grateful to you," said Anna. "But won’t you dine with
us?"
Vronsky gave a hardly perceptible shrug. He was at a complete loss to understand what Anna was about. What had she brought the old Princess Oblonskaya home for, what had she made Tushkevitch stay to dinner for, and, most
amazing of all, why was she sending him for a box? Could she possibly think
in her position of going to Pai’s beneﬁt, where all the circle of her acquaintances would be? He looked at her with serious eyes, but she responded with
that deﬁant, half-mirthful, half-desperate look, the meaning of which he could
not comprehend. At dinner Anna was in aggressively high spirits—she almost
ﬂirted both with Tushkevitch and with Yashvin. When they got up from dinner
and Tushkevitch had gone to get a box at the opera, Yashvin went to smoke, and
Vronsky went down with him to his own rooms. Aer siing there for some time
he ran upstairs. Anna was already dressed in a low-necked gown of light silk and
velvet that she had had made in Paris, and with costly white lace on her head,
framing her face, and particularly becoming, showing up her dazzling beauty.
"Are you really going to the theater?" he said, trying not to look at her.
"Why do you ask with such alarm?" she said, wounded again at his not

cdlxxxix
looking at her. "Why shouldn’t I go?"
She appeared not to understand the motive of his words.
"Oh, of course, there’s no reason whatever," he said, frowning.
"at’s just what I say," she said, willfully refusing to see the irony of his
tone, and quietly turning back her long, perfumed glove.
"Anna, for God’s sake! what is the maer with you?" he said, appealing to
her exactly as once her husband had done.
"I don’t understand what you are asking."
"You know that it’s out of the question to go."
"Why so? I’m not going alone. Princess Varvara has gone to dress, she is
going with me."
He shrugged his shoulders with an air of perplexity and despair.
"But do you mean to say you don’t know?…" he began.
"But I don’t care to know!" she almost shrieked. "I don’t care to. Do I regret
what I have done? No, no, no! If it were all to do again from the beginning,
it would be the same. For us, for you and for me, there is only one thing that
maers, whether we love each other. Other people we need not consider. Why
are we living here apart and not seeing each other? Why can’t I go? I love you,
and I don’t care for anything," she said in Russian, glancing at him with a peculiar
gleam in her eyes that he could not understand. "If you have not changed to me,
why don’t you look at me?"
He looked at her. He saw all the beauty of her face and full dress, always so
becoming to her. But now her beauty and elegance were just what irritated him.
"My feeling cannot change, you know, but I beg you, I entreat you," he said
again in French, with a note of tender supplication in his voice, but with coldness
in his eyes.
She did not hear his words, but she saw the coldness of his eyes, and answered with irritation:
"And I beg you to explain why I should not go."
"Because it might cause you…" he hesitated.
"I don’t understand. Yashvin n’est pas compromeant, and Princess Varvara
is no worse than others. Oh, here she is!"

Chapter 
Vronsky for the ﬁrst time experienced a feeling of anger against Anna, almost a
hatred for her willfully refusing to understand her own position. is feeling was
aggravated by his being unable to tell her plainly the cause of his anger. If he had
told her directly what he was thinking, he would have said:

cdxc
"In that dress, with a princess only too well known to everyone, to show
yourself at the theater is equivalent not merely to acknowledging your position
as a fallen woman, but is ﬂinging down a challenge to society, that is to say, cuing
yourself oﬀ from it forever."
He could not say that to her. "But how can she fail to see it, and what is
going on in her?" he said to himself. He felt at the same time that his respect for
her was diminished while his sense of her beauty was intensiﬁed.
He went back scowling to his rooms, and siing down beside Yashvin, who,
with his long legs stretched out on a chair, was drinking brandy and seltzer water,
he ordered a glass of the same for himself.
"You were talking of Lankovsky’s Powerful. at’s a ﬁne horse, and I would
advise you to buy him," said Yashvin, glancing at his comrade’s gloomy face. "His
hind-quarters aren’t quite ﬁrst-rate, but the legs and head—one couldn’t wish for
anything beer."
"I think I will take him," answered Vronsky.
eir conversation about horses interested him, but he did not for an instant
forget Anna, and could not help listening to the sound of steps in the corridor and
looking at the clock on the chimney piece.
"Anna Arkadyevna gave orders to announce that she has gone to the theater."
Yashvin, tipping another glass of brandy into the bubbling water, drank it
and got up, buoning his coat.
"Well, let’s go," he said, faintly smiling under his mustache, and showing by
this smile that he knew the cause of Vronsky’s gloominess, and did not aach any
signiﬁcance to it.
"I’m not going," Vronsky answered gloomily.
"Well, I must, I promised to. Good-bye, then. If you do, come to the stalls;
you can take Kruzin’s stall," added Yashvin as he went out.
"No, I’m busy."
"A wife is a care, but it’s worse when she’s not a wife," thought Yashvin, as
he walked out of the hotel.
Vronsky, le alone, got up from his chair and began pacing up and down
the room.
"And what’s today? e fourth night…. Yegor and his wife are there, and
my mother, most likely. Of course all Petersburg’s there. Now she’s gone in,
taken oﬀ her cloak and come into the light. Tushkevitch, Yashvin, Princess Varvara," he pictured them to himself…. "What about me? Either that I’m frightened
or have given up to Tushkevitch the right to protect her? From every point of
view—stupid, stupid!… And why is she puing me in such a position?" he said
with a gesture of despair.

cdxci
With that gesture he knocked against the table, on which there was standing
the seltzer water and the decanter of brandy, and almost upset it. He tried to catch
it, let it slip, and angrily kicked the table over and rang.
"If you care to be in my service," he said to the valet who came in, "you had
beer remember your duties. is shouldn’t be here. You ought to have cleared
away."
e valet, conscious of his own innocence, would have defended himself,
but glancing at his master, he saw from his face that the only thing to do was to
be silent, and hurriedly threading his way in and out, dropped down on the carpet
and began gathering up the whole and broken glasses and boles.
"at’s not your duty; send the waiter to clear away, and get my dress coat
out."
Vronsky went into the theater at half-past eight. e performance was in
full swing. e lile old box-keeper, recognizing Vronsky as he helped him oﬀ
with his fur coat, called him "Your Excellency," and suggested he should not take
a number but should simply call Fyodor. In the brightly lighted corridor there
was no one but the box-opener and two aendants with fur cloaks on their arms
listening at the doors. rough the closed doors came the sounds of the discreet
staccato accompaniment of the orchestra, and a single female voice rendering distinctly a musical phrase. e door opened to let the box-opener slip through, and
the phrase drawing to the end reached Vronsky’s hearing clearly. But the doors
were closed again at once, and Vronsky did not hear the end of the phrase and
the cadence of the accompaniment, though he knew from the thunder of applause
that it was over. When he entered the hall, brilliantly lighted with chandeliers and
gas jets, the noise was still going on. On the stage the singer, bowing and smiling,
with bare shoulders ﬂashing with diamonds, was, with the help of the tenor who
had given her his arm, gathering up the bouquets that were ﬂying awkwardly over
the footlights. en she went up to a gentleman with glossy pomaded hair parted
down the center, who was stretching across the footlights holding out something
to her, and all the public in the stalls as well as in the boxes was in excitement,
craning forward, shouting and clapping. e conductor in his high chair assisted
in passing the oﬀering, and straightened his white tie. Vronsky walked into the
middle of the stalls, and, standing still, began looking about him. at day less
than ever was his aention turned upon the familiar, habitual surroundings, the
stage, the noise, all the familiar, uninteresting, particolored herd of spectators in
the packed theater.
ere were, as always, the same ladies of some sort with oﬃcers of some sort
in the back of the boxes; the same gaily dressed women—God knows who—and
uniforms and black coats; the same dirty crowd in the upper gallery; and among
the crowd, in the boxes and in the front rows, were some forty of the real peo-

cdxcii
ple. And to those oases Vronsky at once directed his aention, and with them he
entered at once into relation.
e act was over when he went in, and so he did not go straight to his
brother’s box, but going up to the ﬁrst row of stalls stopped at the footlights with
Serpuhovskoy, who, standing with one knee raised and his heel on the footlights,
caught sight of him in the distance and beckoned to him, smiling.
Vronsky had not yet seen Anna. He purposely avoided looking in her direction. But he knew by the direction of people’s eyes where she was. He looked
round discreetly, but he was not seeking her; expecting the worst, his eyes sought
for Alexey Alexandrovitch. To his relief Alexey Alexandrovitch was not in the
theater that evening.
"How lile of the military man there is le in you!" Serpuhovskoy was saying to him. "A diplomat, an artist, something of that sort, one would say."
"Yes, it was like going back home when I put on a black coat," answered
Vronsky, smiling and slowly taking out his opera glass.
"Well, I’ll own I envy you there. When I come back from abroad and put on
this," he touched his epaulets, "I regret my freedom."
Serpuhovskoy had long given up all hope of Vronsky’s career, but he liked
him as before, and was now particularly cordial to him.
"What a pity you were not in time for the ﬁrst act!"
Vronsky, listening with one ear, moved his opera glass from the stalls and
scanned the boxes. Near a lady in a turban and a bald old man, who seemed to
wave angrily in the moving opera glass, Vronsky suddenly caught sight of Anna’s
head, proud, strikingly beautiful, and smiling in the frame of lace. She was in the
ﬁh box, twenty paces from him. She was siing in front, and slightly turning,
was saying something to Yashvin. e seing of her head on her handsome, broad
shoulders, and the restrained excitement and brilliance of her eyes and her whole
face reminded him of her just as he had seen her at the ball in Moscow. But he
felt uerly diﬀerent towards her beauty now. In his feeling for her now there
was no element of mystery, and so her beauty, though it aracted him even more
intensely than before, gave him now a sense of injury. She was not looking in his
direction, but Vronsky felt that she had seen him already.
When Vronsky turned the opera glass again in that direction, he noticed that
Princess Varvara was particularly red, and kept laughing unnaturally and looking
round at the next box. Anna, folding her fan and tapping it on the red velvet, was
gazing away and did not see, and obviously did not wish to see, what was taking
place in the next box. Yashvin’s face wore the expression which was common
when he was losing at cards. Scowling, he sucked the le end of his mustache
further and further into his mouth, and cast sidelong glances at the next box.
In that box on the le were the Kartasovs. Vronsky knew them, and knew

cdxciii
that Anna was acquainted with them. Madame Kartasova, a thin lile woman,
was standing up in her box, and, her back turned upon Anna, she was puing
on a mantle that her husband was holding for her. Her face was pale and angry,
and she was talking excitedly. Kartasov, a fat, bald man, was continually looking
round at Anna, while he aempted to soothe his wife. When the wife had gone
out, the husband lingered a long while, and tried to catch Anna’s eye, obviously
anxious to bow to her. But Anna, with unmistakable intention, avoided noticing
him, and talked to Yashvin, whose cropped head was bent down to her. Kartasov
went out without making his salutation, and the box was le empty.
Vronsky could not understand exactly what had passed between the Kartasovs and Anna, but he saw that something humiliating for Anna had happened.
He knew this both from what he had seen, and most of all from the face of Anna,
who, he could see, was taxing every nerve to carry through the part she had taken
up. And in maintaining this aitude of external composure she was completely
successful. Anyone who did not know her and her circle, who had not heard all the
uerances of the women expressive of commiseration, indignation, and amazement, that she should show herself in society, and show herself so conspicuously
with her lace and her beauty, would have admired the serenity and loveliness of
this woman without a suspicion that she was undergoing the sensations of a man
in the stocks.
Knowing that something had happened, but not knowing precisely what,
Vronsky felt a thrill of agonizing anxiety, and hoping to ﬁnd out something, he
went towards his brother’s box. Purposely choosing the way round furthest from
Anna’s box, he jostled as he came out against the colonel of his old regiment
talking to two acquaintances. Vronsky heard the name of Madame Karenina, and
noticed how the colonel hastened to address Vronsky loudly by name, with a
meaning glance at his companions.
"Ah, Vronsky! When are you coming to the regiment? We can’t let you oﬀ
without a supper. You’re one of the old set," said the colonel of his regiment.
"I can’t stop, awfully sorry, another time," said Vronsky, and he ran upstairs
towards his brother’s box.
e old countess, Vronsky’s mother, with her steel-gray curls, was in his
brother’s box. Varya with the young Princess Sorokina met him in the corridor.
Leaving the Princess Sorokina with her mother, Varya held out her hand to
her brother-in-law, and began immediately to speak of what interested him. She
was more excited than he had ever seen her.
"I think it’s mean and hateful, and Madame Kartasova had no right to do it.
Madame Karenina…" she began.
"But what is it? I don’t know."
"What? you’ve not heard?"

cdxciv
"You know I should be the last person to hear of it."
"ere isn’t a more spiteful creature than that Madame Kartasova!"
"But what did she do?"
"My husband told me…. She has insulted Madame Karenina. Her husband
began talking to her across the box, and Madame Kartasova made a scene. She
said something aloud, he says, something insulting, and went away."
"Count, your maman is asking for you," said the young Princess Sorokina,
peeping out of the door of the box.
"I’ve been expecting you all the while," said his mother, smiling sarcastically.
"You were nowhere to be seen."
Her son saw that she could not suppress a smile of delight.
"Good evening, maman. I have come to you," he said coldly.
"Why aren’t you going to faire la cour à Madame Karenina?" she went on,
when Princess Sorokina had moved away. "Elle fait sensation. On oublie la Pai
pour elle."
"Maman, I have asked you not to say anything to me of that," he answered,
scowling.
"I’m only saying what everyone’s saying."
Vronsky made no reply, and saying a few words to Princess Sorokina, he
went away. At the door he met his brother.
"Ah, Alexey!" said his brother. "How disgusting! Idiot of a woman, nothing
else…. I wanted to go straight to her. Let’s go together."
Vronsky did not hear him. With rapid steps he went downstairs; he felt that
he must do something, but he did not know what. Anger with her for having put
herself and him in such a false position, together with pity for her suﬀering, ﬁlled
his heart. He went down, and made straight for Anna’s box. At her box stood
Stremov, talking to her.
"ere are no more tenors. Le moule en est brisé!"
Vronsky bowed to her and stopped to greet Stremov.
"You came in late, I think, and have missed the best song," Anna said to
Vronsky, glancing ironically, he thought, at him.
"I am a poor judge of music," he said, looking sternly at her.
"Like Prince Yashvin," she said smiling, "who considers that Pai sings too
loud."
"ank you," she said, her lile hand in its long glove taking the playbill
Vronsky picked up, and suddenly at that instant her lovely face quivered. She got
up and went into the interior of the box.
Noticing in the next act that her box was empty, Vronsky, rousing indignant
"hushes" in the silent audience, went out in the middle of a solo and drove home.
Anna was already at home. When Vronsky went up to her, she was in the

same dress as she had worn at the theater. She was siing in the ﬁrst armchair
against the wall, looking straight before her. She looked at him, and at once resumed her former position.
"Anna," he said.
"You, you are to blame for everything!" she cried, with tears of despair and
hatred in her voice, geing up.
"I begged, I implored you not to go, I knew it would be unpleasant…."
"Unpleasant!" she cried—"hideous! As long as I live I shall never forget it.
She said it was a disgrace to sit beside me."
"A silly woman’s chaer," he said: "but why risk it, why provoke?…"
"I hate your calm. You ought not to have brought me to this. If you had
loved me…"
"Anna! How does the question of my love come in?"
"Oh, if you loved me, as I love, if you were tortured as I am!…" she said,
looking at him with an expression of terror.
He was sorry for her, and angry notwithstanding. He assured her of his
love because he saw that this was the only means of soothing her, and he did not
reproach her in words, but in his heart he reproached her.
And the asseverations of his love, which seemed to him so vulgar that he
was ashamed to uer them, she drank in eagerly, and gradually became calmer.
e next day, completely reconciled, they le for the country.

PART SIX
Chapter 
Darya Alexandrovna spent the summer with her children at Pokrovskoe, at her
sister Kiy Levin’s. e house on her own estate was quite in ruins, and Levin and
his wife had persuaded her to spend the summer with them. Stepan Arkadyevitch
greatly approved of the arrangement. He said he was very sorry his oﬃcial duties
prevented him from spending the summer in the country with his family, which
would have been the greatest happiness for him; and remaining in Moscow, he

cdxcvi
came down to the country from time to time for a day or two. Besides the Oblonskys, with all their children and their governess, the old princess too came to stay
that summer with the Levins, as she considered it her duty to watch over her inexperienced daughter in her interesting condition. Moreover, Varenka, Kiy’s friend
abroad, kept her promise to come to Kiy when she was married, and stayed with
her friend. All of these were friends or relations of Levin’s wife. And though he
liked them all, he rather regreed his own Levin world and ways, which was
smothered by this inﬂux of the "Shtcherbatsky element," as he called it to himself.
Of his own relations there stayed with him only Sergey Ivanovitch, but he too
was a man of the Koznishev and not the Levin stamp, so that the Levin spirit was
uerly obliterated.
In the Levins’ house, so long deserted, there were now so many people that
almost all the rooms were occupied, and almost every day it happened that the
old princess, siing down to table, counted them all over, and put the thirteenth
grandson or granddaughter at a separate table. And Kiy, with her careful housekeeping, had no lile trouble to get all the chickens, turkeys, and geese, of which
so many were needed to satisfy the summer appetites of the visitors and children.
e whole family were siing at dinner. Dolly’s children, with their governess and Varenka, were making plans for going to look for mushrooms. Sergey
Ivanovitch, who was looked up to by all the party for his intellect and learning,
with a respect that almost amounted to awe, surprised everyone by joining in the
conversation about mushrooms.
"Take me with you. I am very fond of picking mushrooms," he said, looking
at Varenka; "I think it’s a very nice occupation."
"Oh, we shall be delighted," answered Varenka, coloring a lile. Kiy exchanged meaningful glances with Dolly. e proposal of the learned and intellectual Sergey Ivanovitch to go looking for mushrooms with Varenka conﬁrmed certain theories of Kiy’s with which her mind had been very busy of late. She made
haste to address some remark to her mother, so that her look should not be noticed.
Aer dinner Sergey Ivanovitch sat with his cup of coﬀee at the drawing-room
window, and while he took part in a conversation he had begun with his brother,
he watched the door through which the children would start on the mushroompicking expedition. Levin was siing in the window near his brother.
Kiy stood beside her husband, evidently awaiting the end of a conversation
that had no interest for her, in order to tell him something.
"You have changed in many respects since your marriage, and for the better," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling to Kiy, and obviously lile interested in the
conversation, "but you have remained true to your passion for defending the most
paradoxical theories."
"Katya, it’s not good for you to stand," her husband said to her, puing a

cdxcvii
chair for her and looking signiﬁcantly at her.
"Oh, and there’s no time either," added Sergey Ivanovitch, seeing the children running out.
At the head of them all Tanya galloped sideways, in her tightly-drawn stockings, and waving a basket and Sergey Ivanovitch’s hat, she ran straight up to him.
Boldly running up to Sergey Ivanovitch with shining eyes, so like her father’s ﬁne eyes, she handed him his hat and made as though she would put it on
for him, soening her freedom by a shy and friendly smile.
"Varenka’s waiting," she said, carefully puing his hat on, seeing from
Sergey Ivanovitch’s smile that she might do so.
Varenka was standing at the door, dressed in a yellow print gown, with a
white kerchief on her head.
"I’m coming, I’m coming, Varvara Andreevna," said Sergey Ivanovitch, ﬁnishing his cup of coﬀee, and puing into their separate pockets his handkerchief
and cigar-case.
"And how sweet my Varenka is! eh?" said Kiy to her husband, as soon
as Sergey Ivanovitch rose. She spoke so that Sergey Ivanovitch could hear, and
it was clear that she meant him to do so. "And how good-looking she is—such a
reﬁned beauty! Varenka!" Kiy shouted. "Shall you be in the mill copse? We’ll
come out to you."
"You certainly forget your condition, Kiy," said the old princess, hurriedly
coming out at the door. "You mustn’t shout like that."
Varenka, hearing Kiy’s voice and her mother’s reprimand, went with light,
rapid steps up to Kiy. e rapidity of her movement, her ﬂushed and eager face,
everything betrayed that something out of the common was going on in her. Kiy
knew what this was, and had been watching her intently. She called Varenka at
that moment merely in order mentally to give her a blessing for the important
event which, as Kiy fancied, was bound to come to pass that day aer dinner in
the wood.
"Varenka, I should be very happy if a certain something were to happen,"
she whispered as she kissed her.
"And are you coming with us?" Varenka said to Levin in confusion, pretending not to have heard what had been said.
"I am coming, but only as far as the threshing-ﬂoor, and there I shall stop."
"Why, what do you want there?" said Kiy.
"I must go to have a look at the new wagons, and to check the invoice," said
Levin; "and where will you be?"
"On the terrace."

cdxcviii

Chapter 
On the terrace were assembled all the ladies of the party. ey always liked siing
there aer dinner, and that day they had work to do there too. Besides the sewing
and kniing of baby clothes, with which all of them were busy, that aernoon jam
was being made on the terrace by a method new to Agafea Mihalovna, without
the addition of water. Kiy had introduced this new method, which had been in
use in her home. Agafea Mihalovna, to whom the task of jam-making had always
been intrusted, considering that what had been done in the Levin household could
not be amiss, had nevertheless put water with the strawberries, maintaining that
the jam could not be made without it. She had been caught in the act, and was
now making jam before everyone, and it was to be proved to her conclusively that
jam could be very well made without water.
Agafea Mihalovna, her face heated and angry, her hair untidy, and her
thin arms bare to the elbows, was turning the preserving-pan over the charcoal
stove, looking darkly at the raspberries and devoutly hoping they would stick and
not cook properly. e princess, conscious that Agafea Mihalovna’s wrath must
be chieﬂy directed against her, as the person responsible for the raspberry jammaking, tried to appear to be absorbed in other things and not interested in the
jam, talked of other maers, but cast stealthy glances in the direction of the stove.
"I always buy my maids’ dresses myself, of some cheap material," the
princess said, continuing the previous conversation. "Isn’t it time to skim it, my
dear?" she added, addressing Agafea Mihalovna. "ere’s not the slightest need
for you to do it, and it’s hot for you," she said, stopping Kiy.
"I’ll do it," said Dolly, and geing up, she carefully passed the spoon over
the frothing sugar, and from time to time shook oﬀ the clinging jam from the
spoon by knocking it on a plate that was covered with yellow-red scum and bloodcolored syrup. "How they’ll enjoy this at tea-time!" she thought of her children,
remembering how she herself as a child had wondered how it was the grown-up
people did not eat what was best of all—the scum of the jam.
"Stiva says it’s much beer to give money." Dolly took up meanwhile the
weighty subject under discussion, what presents should be made to servants.
"But…"
"Money’s out of the question!" the princess and Kiy exclaimed with one
voice. "ey appreciate a present…"
"Well, last year, for instance, I bought our Matrona Semyenovna, not a
poplin, but something of that sort," said the princess.
"I remember she was wearing it on your nameday."
"A charming paern—so simple and reﬁned,—I should have liked it myself,
if she hadn’t had it. Something like Varenka’s. So prey and inexpensive."

cdxcix
"Well, now I think it’s done," said Dolly, dropping the syrup from the spoon.
"When it sets as it drops, it’s ready. Cook it a lile longer, Agafea Mihalovna."
"e ﬂies!" said Agafea Mihalovna angrily. "It’ll be just the same," she added.
"Ah! how sweet it is! don’t frighten it!" Kiy said suddenly, looking at a
sparrow that had seled on the step and was pecking at the center of a raspberry.
"Yes, but you keep a lile further from the stove," said her mother.
"À propos de Varenka," said Kiy, speaking in French, as they had been doing
all the while, so that Agafea Mihalovna should not understand them, "you know,
mamma, I somehow expect things to be seled today. You know what I mean.
How splendid it would be!"
"But what a famous matchmaker she is!" said Dolly. "How carefully and
cleverly she throws them together!…"
"No; tell me, mamma, what do you think?"
"Why, what is one to think? He" (he meant Sergey Ivanovitch) "might at
any time have been a match for anyone in Russia; now, of course, he’s not quite
a young man, still I know ever so many girls would be glad to marry him even
now…. She’s a very nice girl, but he might…"
"Oh, no, mamma, do understand why, for him and for her too, nothing beer
could be imagined. In the ﬁrst place, she’s charming!" said Kiy, crooking one of
her ﬁngers.
"He thinks her very aractive, that’s certain," assented Dolly.
"en he occupies such a position in society that he has no need to look for
either fortune or position in his wife. All he needs is a good, sweet wife—a restful
one."
"Well, with her he would certainly be restful," Dolly assented.
"irdly, that she should love him. And so it is … that is, it would be so
splendid!… I look forward to seeing them coming out of the forest—and everything seled. I shall see at once by their eyes. I should be so delighted! What do
you think, Dolly?"
"But don’t excite yourself. It’s not at all the thing for you to be excited," said
her mother.
"Oh, I’m not excited, mamma. I fancy he will make her an oﬀer today."
"Ah, that’s so strange, how and when a man makes an oﬀer!… ere is a
sort of barrier, and all at once it’s broken down," said Dolly, smiling pensively and
recalling her past with Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Mamma, how did papa make you an oﬀer?" Kiy asked suddenly.
"ere was nothing out of the way, it was very simple," answered the
princess, but her face beamed all over at the recollection.
"Oh, but how was it? You loved him, anyway, before you were allowed to

d
speak?"
Kiy felt a peculiar pleasure in being able now to talk to her mother on
equal terms about those questions of such paramount interest in a woman’s life.
"Of course I did; he had come to stay with us in the country."
"But how was it seled between you, mamma?"
"You imagine, I dare say, that you invented something quite new? It’s always just the same: it was seled by the eyes, by smiles…"
"How nicely you said that, mamma! It’s just by the eyes, by smiles that it’s
done," Dolly assented.
"But what words did he say?"
"What did Kostya say to you?"
"He wrote it in chalk. It was wonderful…. How long ago it seems!" she said.
And the three women all fell to musing on the same thing. Kiy was the
ﬁrst to break the silence. She remembered all that last winter before her marriage,
and her passion for Vronsky.
"ere’s one thing … that old love aﬀair of Varenka’s," she said, a natural
chain of ideas bringing her to this point. "I should have liked to say something
to Sergey Ivanovitch, to prepare him. ey’re all—all men, I mean," she added,
"awfully jealous over our past."
"Not all," said Dolly. "You judge by your own husband. It makes him miserable even now to remember Vronsky. Eh? that’s true, isn’t it?"
"Yes," Kiy answered, a pensive smile in her eyes.
"But I really don’t know," the mother put in in defense of her motherly care
of her daughter, "what there was in your past that could worry him? at Vronsky
paid you aentions—that happens to every girl."
"Oh, yes, but we didn’t mean that," Kiy said, ﬂushing a lile.
"No, let me speak," her mother went on, "why, you yourself would not let
me have a talk to Vronsky. Don’t you remember?"
"Oh, mamma!" said Kiy, with an expression of suﬀering.
"ere’s no keeping you young people in check nowadays…. Your friendship could not have gone beyond what was suitable. I should myself have called
upon him to explain himself. But, my darling, it’s not right for you to be agitated.
Please remember that, and calm yourself."
"I’m perfectly calm, maman."
"How happy it was for Kiy that Anna came then," said Dolly, "and how
unhappy for her. It turned out quite the opposite," she said, struck by her own
ideas. "en Anna was so happy, and Kiy thought herself unhappy. Now it is
just the opposite. I oen think of her."
"A nice person to think about! Horrid, repulsive woman—no heart," said her
mother, who could not forget that Kiy had married not Vronsky, but Levin.

di
"What do you want to talk of it for?" Kiy said with annoyance. "I never
think about it, and I don’t want to think of it…. And I don’t want to think of it,"
she said, catching the sound of her husband’s well-known step on the steps of the
terrace.
"What’s that you don’t want to think about?" inquired Levin, coming onto
the terrace.
But no one answered him, and he did not repeat the question.
"I’m sorry I’ve broken in on your feminine parliament," he said, looking
round on every one discontentedly, and perceiving that they had been talking of
something which they would not talk about before him.
For a second he felt that he was sharing the feeling of Agafea Mihalovna,
vexation at their making jam without water, and altogether at the outside
Shtcherbatsky element. He smiled, however, and went up to Kiy.
"Well, how are you?" he asked her, looking at her with the expression with
which everyone looked at her now.
"Oh, very well," said Kiy, smiling, "and how have things gone with you?"
"e wagons held three times as much as the old carts did. Well, are we
going for the children? I’ve ordered the horses to be put in."
"What! you want to take Kiy in the wagonee?" her mother said reproachfully.
"Yes, at a walking pace, princess."
Levin never called the princess "maman" as men oen do call their mothersin-law, and the princess disliked his not doing so. But though he liked and respected the princess, Levin could not call her so without a sense of profaning his
feeling for his dead mother.
"Come with us, maman," said Kiy.
"I don’t like to see such imprudence."
"Well, I’ll walk then, I’m so well." Kiy got up and went to her husband and
took his hand.
"You may be well, but everything in moderation," said the princess.
"Well, Agafea Mihalovna, is the jam done?" said Levin, smiling to Agafea
Mihalovna, and trying to cheer her up. "Is it all right in the new way?"
"I suppose it’s all right. For our notions it’s boiled too long."
"It’ll be all the beer, Agafea Mihalovna, it won’t mildew, even though our
ice has begun to thaw already, so that we’ve no cool cellar to store it," said Kiy,
at once divining her husband’s motive, and addressing the old housekeeper with
the same feeling; "but your pickle’s so good, that mamma says she never tasted
any like it," she added, smiling, and puing her kerchief straight.
Agafea Mihalovna looked angrily at Kiy.
"You needn’t try to console me, mistress. I need only to look at you with

dii
him, and I feel happy," she said, and something in the rough familiarity of that
with him touched Kiy.
"Come along with us to look for mushrooms, you will show us the best
places." Agafea Mihalovna smiled and shook her head, as though to say: "I should
like to be angry with you too, but I can’t."
"Do it, please, by my receipt," said the princess; "put some paper over the
jam, and moisten it with a lile rum, and without even ice, it will never go
mildewy."

Chapter 
Kiy was particularly glad of a chance of being alone with her husband, for she
had noticed the shade of mortiﬁcation that had passed over his face—always so
quick to reﬂect every feeling—at the moment when he had come onto the terrace
and asked what they were talking of, and had got no answer.
When they had set oﬀ on foot ahead of the others, and had come out of sight
of the house onto the beaten dusty road, marked with rusty wheels and sprinkled
with grains of corn, she clung faster to his arm and pressed it closer to her. He
had quite forgoen the momentary unpleasant impression, and alone with her
he felt, now that the thought of her approaching motherhood was never for a
moment absent from his mind, a new and delicious bliss, quite pure from all alloy
of sense, in the being near to the woman he loved. ere was no need of speech,
yet he longed to hear the sound of her voice, which like her eyes had changed
since she had been with child. In her voice, as in her eyes, there was that soness
and gravity which is found in people continually concentrated on some cherished
pursuit.
"So you’re not tired? Lean more on me," said he.
"No, I’m so glad of a chance of being alone with you, and I must own, though
I’m happy with them, I do regret our winter evenings alone."
"at was good, but this is even beer. Both are beer," he said, squeezing
her hand.
"Do you know what we were talking about when you came in?"
"About jam?"
"Oh, yes, about jam too; but aerwards, about how men make oﬀers."
"Ah!" said Levin, listening more to the sound of her voice than to the words
she was saying, and all the while paying aention to the road, which passed now
through the forest, and avoiding places where she might make a false step.
"And about Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka. You’ve noticed?… I’m very
anxious for it," she went on. "What do you think about it?" And she peeped into

diii
his face.
"I don’t know what to think," Levin answered, smiling. "Sergey seems very
strange to me in that way. I told you, you know…"
"Yes, that he was in love with that girl who died…."
"at was when I was a child; I know about it from hearsay and tradition. I
remember him then. He was wonderfully sweet. But I’ve watched him since with
women; he is friendly, some of them he likes, but one feels that to him they’re
simply people, not women."
"Yes, but now with Varenka … I fancy there’s something…"
"Perhaps there is…. But one has to know him…. He’s a peculiar, wonderful
person. He lives a spiritual life only. He’s too pure, too exalted a nature."
"Why? Would this lower him, then?"
"No, but he’s so used to a spiritual life that he can’t reconcile himself with
actual fact, and Varenka is aer all fact."
Levin had grown used by now to uering his thought boldly, without taking the trouble of clothing it in exact language. He knew that his wife, in such
moments of loving tenderness as now, would understand what he meant to say
from a hint, and she did understand him.
"Yes, but there’s not so much of that actual fact about her as about me. I can
see that he would never have cared for me. She is altogether spiritual."
"Oh, no, he is so fond of you, and I am always so glad when my people like
you…."
"Yes, he’s very nice to me; but…"
"It’s not as it was with poor Nikolay … you really cared for each other,"
Levin ﬁnished. "Why not speak of him?" he added. "I sometimes blame myself
for not; it ends in one’s forgeing. Ah, how terrible and dear he was!… Yes, what
were we talking about?" Levin said, aer a pause.
"You think he can’t fall in love," said Kiy, translating into her own language.
"It’s not so much that he can’t fall in love," Levin said, smiling, "but he has
not the weakness necessary…. I’ve always envied him, and even now, when I’m
so happy, I still envy him."
"You envy him for not being able to fall in love?"
"I envy him for being beer than I," said Levin. "He does not live for himself.
His whole life is subordinated to his duty. And that’s why he can be calm and
contented."
"And you?" Kiy asked, with an ironical and loving smile.
She could never have explained the chain of thought that made her smile;
but the last link in it was that her husband, in exalting his brother and abasing
himself, was not quite sincere. Kiy knew that this insincerity came from his love
for his brother, from his sense of shame at being too happy, and above all from

div
his unﬂagging craving to be beer—she loved it in him, and so she smiled.
"And you? What are you dissatisﬁed with?" she asked, with the same smile.
Her disbelief in his self-dissatisfaction delighted him, and unconsciously he
tried to draw her into giving uerance to the grounds of her disbelief.
"I am happy, but dissatisﬁed with myself…" he said.
"Why, how can you be dissatisﬁed with yourself if you are happy?"
"Well, how shall I say?… In my heart I really care for nothing whatever
but that you should not stumble—see? Oh, but really you mustn’t skip about like
that!" he cried, breaking oﬀ to scold her for too agile a movement in stepping over
a branch that lay in the path. "But when I think about myself, and compare myself
with others, especially with my brother, I feel I’m a poor creature."
"But in what way?" Kiy pursued with the same smile. "Don’t you too
work for others? What about your co-operative selement, and your work on
the estate, and your book?…"
"Oh, but I feel, and particularly just now—it’s your fault," he said, pressing
her hand—"that all that doesn’t count. I do it in a way haleartedly. If I could
care for all that as I care for you!… Instead of that, I do it in these days like a task
that is set me."
"Well, what would you say about papa?" asked Kiy. "Is he a poor creature
then, as he does nothing for the public good?"
"He?—no! But then one must have the simplicity, the straightforwardness,
the goodness of your father: and I haven’t got that. I do nothing, and I fret about
it. It’s all your doing. Before there was you—and this too," he added with a glance
towards her waist that she understood—"I put all my energies into work; now I
can’t, and I’m ashamed; I do it just as though it were a task set me, I’m pretending…."
"Well, but would you like to change this minute with Sergey Ivanovitch?"
said Kiy. "Would you like to do this work for the general good, and to love the
task set you, as he does, and nothing else?"
"Of course not," said Levin. "But I’m so happy that I don’t understand anything. So you think he’ll make her an oﬀer today?" he added aer a brief silence.
"I think so, and I don’t think so. Only, I’m awfully anxious for it. Here, wait
a minute." She stooped down and picked a wild camomile at the edge of the path.
"Come, count: he does propose, he doesn’t," she said, giving him the ﬂower.
"He does, he doesn’t," said Levin, tearing oﬀ the white petals.
"No, no!" Kiy, snatching at his hand, stopped him. She had been watching
his ﬁngers with interest. "You picked oﬀ two."
"Oh, but see, this lile one shan’t count to make up," said Levin, tearing oﬀ
a lile half-grown petal. "Here’s the wagonee overtaking us."
"Aren’t you tired, Kiy?" called the princess.

dv
"Not in the least."
"If you are you can get in, as the horses are quiet and walking."
But it was not worth while to get in, they were quite near the place, and all
walked on together.

Chapter 
Varenka, with her white kerchief on her black hair, surrounded by the children,
gaily and good-humoredly looking aer them, and at the same time visibly excited
at the possibility of receiving a declaration from the man she cared for, was very
aractive. Sergey Ivanovitch walked beside her, and never le oﬀ admiring her.
Looking at her, he recalled all the delightful things he had heard from her lips, all
the good he knew about her, and became more and more conscious that the feeling
he had for her was something special that he had felt long, long ago, and only once,
in his early youth. e feeling of happiness in being near her continually grew,
and at last reached such a point that, as he put a huge, slender-stalked agaric
fungus in her basket, he looked straight into her face, and noticing the ﬂush of
glad and alarmed excitement that overspread her face, he was confused himself,
and smiled to her in silence a smile that said too much.
"If so," he said to himself, "I ought to think it over and make up my mind,
and not give way like a boy to the impulse of a moment."
"I’m going to pick by myself apart from all the rest, or else my eﬀorts will
make no show," he said, and he le the edge of the forest where they were walking
on low silky grass between old birch trees standing far apart, and went more
into the heart of the wood, where between the white birch trunks there were
gray trunks of aspen and dark bushes of hazel. Walking some forty paces away,
Sergey Ivanovitch, knowing he was out of sight, stood still behind a bushy spindletree in full ﬂower with its rosy red catkins. It was perfectly still all round him.
Only overhead in the birches under which he stood, the ﬂies, like a swarm of
bees, buzzed unceasingly, and from time to time the children’s voices were ﬂoated
across to him. All at once he heard, not far from the edge of the wood, the sound of
Varenka’s contralto voice, calling Grisha, and a smile of delight passed over Sergey
Ivanovitch’s face. Conscious of this smile, he shook his head disapprovingly at his
own condition, and taking out a cigar, he began lighting it. For a long while he
could not get a match to light against the trunk of a birch tree. e so scales of the
white bark rubbed oﬀ the phosphorus, and the light went out. At last one of the
matches burned, and the fragrant cigar smoke, hovering uncertainly in ﬂat, wide
coils, stretched away forwards and upwards over a bush under the overhanging
branches of a birch tree. Watching the streak of smoke, Sergey Ivanovitch walked

dvi
gently on, deliberating on his position.
"Why not?" he thought. "If it were only a passing fancy or a passion, if it
were only this araction—this mutual araction (I can call it a mutual araction),
but if I felt that it was in contradiction with the whole bent of my life—if I felt that
in giving way to this araction I should be false to my vocation and my duty …
but it’s not so. e only thing I can say against it is that, when I lost Marie, I said
to myself that I would remain faithful to her memory. at’s the only thing I can
say against my feeling…. at’s a great thing," Sergey Ivanovitch said to himself,
feeling at the same time that this consideration had not the slightest importance
for him personally, but would only perhaps detract from his romantic character in
the eyes of others. "But apart from that, however much I searched, I should never
ﬁnd anything to say against my feeling. If I were choosing by considerations of
suitability alone, I could not have found anything beer."
However many women and girls he thought of whom he knew, he could
not think of a girl who united to such a degree all, positively all, the qualities
he would wish to see in his wife. She had all the charm and freshness of youth,
but she was not a child; and if she loved him, she loved him consciously as a
woman ought to love; that was one thing. Another point: she was not only far
from being worldly, but had an unmistakable distaste for worldly society, and
at the same time she knew the world, and had all the ways of a woman of the
best society, which were absolutely essential to Sergey Ivanovitch’s conception
of the woman who was to share his life. irdly: she was religious, and not like
a child, unconsciously religious and good, as Kiy, for example, was, but her life
was founded on religious principles. Even in triﬂing maers, Sergey Ivanovitch
found in her all that he wanted in his wife: she was poor and alone in the world,
so she would not bring with her a mass of relations and their inﬂuence into her
husband’s house, as he saw now in Kiy’s case. She would owe everything to her
husband, which was what he had always desired too for his future family life. And
this girl, who united all these qualities, loved him. He was a modest man, but he
could not help seeing it. And he loved her. ere was one consideration against
it—his age. But he came of a long-lived family, he had not a single gray hair, no
one would have taken him for forty, and he remembered Varenka’s saying that it
was only in Russia that men of ﬁy thought themselves old, and that in France a
man of ﬁy considers himself dans la force de l’âge, while a man of forty is un jeune
homme. But what did the mere reckoning of years maer when he felt as young
in heart as he had been twenty years ago? Was it not youth to feel as he felt now,
when coming from the other side to the edge of the wood he saw in the glowing
light of the slanting sunbeams the gracious ﬁgure of Varenka in her yellow gown
with her basket, walking lightly by the trunk of an old birch tree, and when this
impression of the sight of Varenka blended so harmoniously with the beauty of

dvii
the view, of the yellow oatﬁeld lying bathed in the slanting sunshine, and beyond
it the distant ancient forest ﬂecked with yellow and melting into the blue of the
distance? His heart throbbed joyously. A soened feeling came over him. He felt
that he had made up his mind. Varenka, who had just crouched down to pick a
mushroom, rose with a supple movement and looked round. Flinging away the
cigar, Sergey Ivanovitch advanced with resolute steps towards her.

Chapter 
"Varvara Andreevna, when I was very young, I set before myself the ideal of the
woman I loved and should be happy to call my wife. I have lived through a long
life, and now for the ﬁrst time I have met what I sought—in you. I love you, and
oﬀer you my hand."
Sergey Ivanovitch was saying this to himself while he was ten paces from
Varvara. Kneeling down, with her hands over the mushrooms to guard them from
Grisha, she was calling lile Masha.
"Come here, lile ones! ere are so many!" she was saying in her sweet,
deep voice.
Seeing Sergey Ivanovitch approaching, she did not get up and did not
change her position, but everything told him that she felt his presence and was
glad of it.
"Well, did you ﬁnd some?" she asked from under the white kerchief, turning
her handsome, gently smiling face to him.
"Not one," said Sergey Ivanovitch. "Did you?"
She did not answer, busy with the children who thronged about her.
"at one too, near the twig," she pointed out to lile Masha a lile fungus,
split in half across its rosy cap by the dry grass from under which it thrust itself.
Varenka got up while Masha picked the fungus, breaking it into two white halves.
"is brings back my childhood," she added, moving apart from the children beside
Sergey Ivanovitch.
ey walked on for some steps in silence. Varenka saw that he wanted to
speak; she guessed of what, and felt faint with joy and panic. ey had walked
so far away that no one could hear them now, but still he did not begin to speak.
It would have been beer for Varenka to be silent. Aer a silence it would have
been easier for them to say what they wanted to say than aer talking about
mushrooms. But against her own will, as it were accidentally, Varenka said:
"So you found nothing? In the middle of the wood there are always fewer,
though." Sergey Ivanovitch sighed and made no answer. He was annoyed that she
had spoken about the mushrooms. He wanted to bring her back to the ﬁrst words

dviii
she had uered about her childhood; but aer a pause of some length, as though
against his own will, he made an observation in response to her last words.
"I have heard that the white edible funguses are found principally at the
edge of the wood, though I can’t tell them apart."
Some minutes more passed, they moved still further away from the children,
and were quite alone. Varenka’s heart throbbed so that she heard it beating, and
felt that she was turning red and pale and red again.
To be the wife of a man like Koznishev, aer her position with Madame
Stahl, was to her imagination the height of happiness. Besides, she was almost
certain that she was in love with him. And this moment it would have to be
decided. She felt frightened. She dreaded both his speaking and his not speaking.
Now or never it must be said—that Sergey Ivanovitch felt too. Everything
in the expression, the ﬂushed cheeks and the downcast eyes of Varenka betrayed
a painful suspense. Sergey Ivanovitch saw it and felt sorry for her. He felt even
that to say nothing now would be a slight to her. Rapidly in his own mind he ran
over all the arguments in support of his decision. He even said over to himself
the words in which he meant to put his oﬀer, but instead of those words, some
uerly unexpected reﬂection that occurred to him made him ask:
"What is the diﬀerence between the ‘birch’ mushroom and the ‘white’
mushroom?"
Varenka’s lips quivered with emotion as she answered:
"In the top part there is scarcely any diﬀerence, it’s in the stalk."
And as soon as these words were uered, both he and she felt that it was
over, that what was to have been said would not be said; and their emotion, which
had up to then been continually growing more intense, began to subside.
"e birch mushroom’s stalk suggests a dark man’s chin aer two days without shaving," said Sergey Ivanovitch, speaking quite calmly now.
"Yes, that’s true," answered Varenka smiling, and unconsciously the direction of their walk changed. ey began to turn towards the children. Varenka felt
both sore and ashamed; at the same time she had a sense of relief.
When he had got home again and went over the whole subject, Sergey
Ivanovitch thought his previous decision had been a mistaken one. He could not
be false to the memory of Marie.
"Gently, children, gently!" Levin shouted quite angrily to the children,
standing before his wife to protect her when the crowd of children ﬂew with
shrieks of delight to meet them.
Behind the children Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka walked out of the wood.
Kiy had no need to ask Varenka; she saw from the calm and somewhat crestfallen
faces of both that her plans had not come oﬀ.
"Well?" her husband questioned her as they were going home again.

dix
"It doesn’t bite," said Kiy, her smile and manner of speaking recalling her
father, a likeness Levin oen noticed with pleasure.
"How doesn’t bite?"
"I’ll show you," she said, taking her husband’s hand, liing it to her mouth,
and just faintly brushing it with closed lips. "Like a kiss on a priest’s hand."
"Which didn’t it bite with?" he said, laughing.
"Both. But it should have been like this…"
"ere are some peasants coming…"
"Oh, they didn’t see."

Chapter 
During the time of the children’s tea the grown-up people sat in the balcony
and talked as though nothing had happened, though they all, especially Sergey
Ivanovitch and Varenka, were very well aware that there had happened an event
which, though negative, was of very great importance. ey both had the same
feeling, rather like that of a schoolboy aer an examination, which has le him
in the same class or shut him out of the school forever. Everyone present, feeling too that something had happened, talked eagerly about extraneous subjects.
Levin and Kiy were particularly happy and conscious of their love that evening.
And their happiness in their love seemed to imply a disagreeable slur on those
who would have liked to feel the same and could not—and they felt a prick of
conscience.
"Mark my words, Alexander will not come," said the old princess.
at evening they were expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch to come down by
train, and the old prince had wrien that possibly he might come too.
"And I know why," the princess went on; "he says that young people ought
to be le alone for a while at ﬁrst."
"But papa has le us alone. We’ve never seen him," said Kiy. "Besides,
we’re not young people!—we’re old, married people by now."
"Only if he doesn’t come, I shall say good-bye to you children," said the
princess, sighing mournfully.
"What nonsense, mamma!" both the daughters fell upon her at once.
"How do you suppose he is feeling? Why, now…"
And suddenly there was an unexpected quiver in the princess’s voice. Her
daughters were silent, and looked at one another. "Maman always ﬁnds something
to be miserable about," they said in that glance. ey did not know that happy as
the princess was in her daughter’s house, and useful as she felt herself to be there,
she had been extremely miserable, both on her own account and her husband’s,

dx
ever since they had married their last and favorite daughter, and the old home
had been le empty.
"What is it, Agafea Mihalovna?" Kiy asked suddenly of Agafea Mihalovna,
who was standing with a mysterious air, and a face full of meaning.
"About supper."
"Well, that’s right," said Dolly; "you go and arrange about it, and I’ll go and
hear Grisha repeat his lesson, or else he will have nothing done all day."
"at’s my lesson! No, Dolly, I’m going," said Levin, jumping up.
Grisha, who was by now at a high school, had to go over the lessons of
the term in the summer holidays. Darya Alexandrovna, who had been studying
Latin with her son in Moscow before, had made it a rule on coming to the Levins’
to go over with him, at least once a day, the most diﬃcult lessons of Latin and
arithmetic. Levin had oﬀered to take her place, but the mother, having once overheard Levin’s lesson, and noticing that it was not given exactly as the teacher in
Moscow had given it, said resolutely, though with much embarrassment and anxiety not to mortify Levin, that they must keep strictly to the book as the teacher
had done, and that she had beer undertake it again herself. Levin was amazed
both at Stepan Arkadyevitch, who, by neglecting his duty, threw upon the mother
the supervision of studies of which she had no comprehension, and at the teachers
for teaching the children so badly. But he promised his sister-in-law to give the
lessons exactly as she wished. And he went on teaching Grisha, not in his own
way, but by the book, and so took lile interest in it, and oen forgot the hour of
the lesson. So it had been today.
"No, I’m going, Dolly, you sit still," he said. "We’ll do it all properly, like the
book. Only when Stiva comes, and we go out shooting, then we shall have to miss
it."
And Levin went to Grisha.
Varenka was saying the same thing to Kiy. Even in the happy, well-ordered
household of the Levins Varenka had succeeded in making herself useful.
"I’ll see to the supper, you sit still," she said, and got up to go to Agafea
Mihalovna.
"Yes, yes, most likely they’ve not been able to get chickens. If so, ours…"
"Agafea Mihalovna and I will see about it," and Varenka vanished with her.
"What a nice girl!" said the princess.
"Not nice, maman; she’s an exquisite girl; there’s no one else like her."
"So you are expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch today?" said Sergey Ivanovitch,
evidently not disposed to pursue the conversation about Varenka. "It would be
diﬃcult to ﬁnd two sons-in-law more unlike than yours," he said with a subtle
smile. "One all movement, only living in society, like a ﬁsh in water; the other
our Kostya, lively, alert, quick in everything, but as soon as he is in society, he

dxi
either sinks into apathy, or struggles helplessly like a ﬁsh on land."
"Yes, he’s very heedless," said the princess, addressing Sergey Ivanovitch.
"I’ve been meaning, indeed, to ask you to tell him that it’s out of the question for
her" (she indicated Kiy) "to stay here; that she positively must come to Moscow.
He talks of geing a doctor down…"
"Maman, he’ll do everything; he has agreed to everything," Kiy said, angry
with her mother for appealing to Sergey Ivanovitch to judge in such a maer.
In the middle of their conversation they heard the snorting of horses and
the sound of wheels on the gravel. Dolly had not time to get up to go and meet her
husband, when from the window of the room below, where Grisha was having
his lesson, Levin leaped out and helped Grisha out aer him.
"It’s Stiva!" Levin shouted from under the balcony. "We’ve ﬁnished, Dolly,
don’t be afraid!" he added, and started running like a boy to meet the carriage.
"Is ea id, ejus, ejus, ejus!" shouted Grisha, skipping along the avenue.
"And some one else too! Papa, of course!" cried Levin, stopping at the entrance of the avenue. "Kiy, don’t come down the steep staircase, go round."
But Levin had been mistaken in taking the person siing in the carriage for
the old prince. As he got nearer to the carriage he saw beside Stepan Arkadyevitch not the prince but a handsome, stout young man in a Scotch cap, with
long ends of ribbon behind. is was Vassenka Veslovsky, a distant cousin of the
Shtcherbatskys, a brilliant young gentleman in Petersburg and Moscow society.
"A capital fellow, and a keen sportsman," as Stepan Arkadyevitch said, introducing
him.
Not a whit abashed by the disappointment caused by his having come in
place of the old prince, Veslovsky greeted Levin gaily, claiming acquaintance with
him in the past, and snatching up Grisha into the carriage, lied him over the
pointer that Stepan Arkadyevitch had brought with him.
Levin did not get into the carriage, but walked behind. He was rather vexed
at the non-arrival of the old prince, whom he liked more and more the more he
saw of him, and also at the arrival of this Vassenka Veslovsky, a quite uncongenial
and superﬂuous person. He seemed to him still more uncongenial and superﬂuous
when, on approaching the steps where the whole party, children and grown-up,
were gathered together in much excitement, Levin saw Vassenka Veslovsky, with
a particularly warm and gallant air, kissing Kiy’s hand.
"Your wife and I are cousins and very old friends," said Vassenka Veslovsky,
once more shaking Levin’s hand with great warmth.
"Well, are there plenty of birds?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to Levin, hardly
leaving time for everyone to uer their greetings. "We’ve come with the most
savage intentions. Why, maman, they’ve not been in Moscow since! Look, Tanya,
here’s something for you! Get it, please, it’s in the carriage, behind!" he talked in

dxii
all directions. "How prey you’ve grown, Dolly," he said to his wife, once more
kissing her hand, holding it in one of his, and paing it with the other.
Levin, who a minute before had been in the happiest frame of mind, now
looked darkly at everyone, and everything displeased him.
"Who was it he kissed yesterday with those lips?" he thought, looking at
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s tender demonstrations to his wife. He looked at Dolly,
and he did not like her either.
"She doesn’t believe in his love. So what is she so pleased about? Revolting!"
thought Levin.
He looked at the princess, who had been so dear to him a minute before,
and he did not like the manner in which she welcomed this Vassenka, with his
ribbons, just as though she were in her own house.
Even Sergey Ivanovitch, who had come out too onto the steps, seemed to
him unpleasant with the show of cordiality with which he met Stepan Arkadyevitch, though Levin knew that his brother neither liked nor respected Oblonsky.
And Varenka, even she seemed hateful, with her air sainte nitoue making the acquaintance of this gentleman, while all the while she was thinking of
nothing but geing married.
And more hateful than anyone was Kiy for falling in with the tone of
gaiety with which this gentleman regarded his visit in the country, as though it
were a holiday for himself and everyone else. And, above all, unpleasant was that
particular smile with which she responded to his smile.
Noisily talking, they all went into the house; but as soon as they were all
seated, Levin turned and went out.
Kiy saw something was wrong with her husband. She tried to seize a
moment to speak to him alone, but he made haste to get away from her, saying he
was wanted at the counting-house. It was long since his own work on the estate
had seemed to him so important as at that moment. "It’s all holiday for them," he
thought; "but these are no holiday maers, they won’t wait, and there’s no living
without them."

Chapter 
Levin came back to the house only when they sent to summon him to supper. On
the stairs were standing Kiy and Agafea Mihalovna, consulting about wines for
supper.
"But why are you making all this fuss? Have what we usually do."
"No, Stiva doesn’t drink … Kostya, stop, what’s the maer?" Kiy began,
hurrying aer him, but he strode ruthlessly away to the dining room without

dxiii
waiting for her, and at once joined in the lively general conversation which was
being maintained there by Vassenka Veslovsky and Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Well, what do you say, are we going shooting tomorrow?" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch.
"Please, do let’s go," said Veslovsky, moving to another chair, where he sat
down sideways, with one fat leg crossed under him.
"I shall be delighted, we will go. And have you had any shooting yet this
year?" said Levin to Veslovsky, looking intently at his leg, but speaking with that
forced amiability that Kiy knew so well in him, and that was so out of keeping
with him. "I can’t answer for our ﬁnding grouse, but there are plenty of snipe.
Only we ought to start early. You’re not tired? Aren’t you tired, Stiva?"
"Me tired? I’ve never been tired yet. Suppose we stay up all night. Let’s go
for a walk!"
"Yes, really, let’s not go to bed at all! Capital!" Veslovsky chimed in.
"Oh, we all know you can do without sleep, and keep other people up too,"
Dolly said to her husband, with that faint note of irony in her voice which she
almost always had now with her husband. "But to my thinking, it’s time for bed
now…. I’m going, I don’t want supper."
"No, do stay a lile, Dolly," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, going round to her
side behind the table where they were having supper. "I’ve so much still to tell
you."
"Nothing really, I suppose."
"Do you know Veslovsky has been at Anna’s, and he’s going to them again?
You know they’re hardly ﬁy miles from you, and I too must certainly go over
there. Veslovsky, come here!"
Vassenka crossed over to the ladies, and sat down beside Kiy.
"Ah, do tell me, please; you have stayed with her? How was she?" Darya
Alexandrovna appealed to him.
Levin was le at the other end of the table, and though never pausing in
his conversation with the princess and Varenka, he saw that there was an eager
and mysterious conversation going on between Stepan Arkadyevitch, Dolly, Kiy,
and Veslovsky. And that was not all. He saw on his wife’s face an expression of
real feeling as she gazed with ﬁxed eyes on the handsome face of Vassenka, who
was telling them something with great animation.
"It’s exceedingly nice at their place," Veslovsky was telling them about Vronsky and Anna. "I can’t, of course, take it upon myself to judge, but in their house
you feel the real feeling of home."
"What do they intend doing?"
"I believe they think of going to Moscow."
"How jolly it would be for us all to go over to them together! When are you

dxiv
going there?" Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Vassenka.
"I’m spending July there."
"Will you go?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his wife.
"I’ve been wanting to a long while; I shall certainly go," said Dolly. "I am
sorry for her, and I know her. She’s a splendid woman. I will go alone, when you
go back, and then I shall be in no one’s way. And it will be beer indeed without
you."
"To be sure," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "And you, Kiy?"
"I? Why should I go?" Kiy said, ﬂushing all over, and she glanced round at
her husband.
"Do you know Anna Arkadyevna, then?" Veslovsky asked her. "She’s a very
fascinating woman."
"Yes," she answered Veslovsky, crimsoning still more. She got up and walked
across to her husband.
"Are you going shooting, then, tomorrow?" she said.
His jealousy had in these few moments, especially at the ﬂush that had
overspread her cheeks while she was talking to Veslovsky, gone far indeed. Now
as he heard her words, he construed them in his own fashion. Strange as it was
to him aerwards to recall it, it seemed to him at the moment clear that in asking
whether he was going shooting, all she cared to know was whether he would give
that pleasure to Vassenka Veslovsky, with whom, as he fancied, she was in love.
"Yes, I’m going," he answered her in an unnatural voice, disagreeable to
himself.
"No, beer spend the day here tomorrow, or Dolly won’t see anything of
her husband, and set oﬀ the day aer," said Kiy.
e motive of Kiy’s words was interpreted by Levin thus: "Don’t separate
me from him. I don’t care about your going, but do let me enjoy the society of this
delightful young man."
"Oh, if you wish, we’ll stay here tomorrow," Levin answered, with peculiar
amiability.
Vassenka meanwhile, uerly unsuspecting the misery his presence had occasioned, got up from the table aer Kiy, and watching her with smiling and
admiring eyes, he followed her.
Levin saw that look. He turned white, and for a minute he could hardly
breathe. "How dare he look at my wife like that!" was the feeling that boiled
within him.
"Tomorrow, then? Do, please, let us go," said Vassenka, siing down on a
chair, and again crossing his leg as his habit was.
Levin’s jealousy went further still. Already he saw himself a deceived husband, looked upon by his wife and her lover as simply necessary to provide them

dxv
with the conveniences and pleasures of life…. But in spite of that he made polite
and hospitable inquiries of Vassenka about his shooting, his gun, and his boots,
and agreed to go shooting next day.
Happily for Levin, the old princess cut short his agonies by geing up herself
and advising Kiy to go to bed. But even at this point Levin could not escape
another agony. As he said good-night to his hostess, Vassenka would again have
kissed her hand, but Kiy, reddening, drew back her hand and said with a naïve
bluntness, for which the old princess scolded her aerwards:
"We don’t like that fashion."
In Levin’s eyes she was to blame for having allowed such relations to arise,
and still more to blame for showing so awkwardly that she did not like them.
"Why, how can one want to go to bed!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who,
aer drinking several glasses of wine at supper, was now in his most charming
and sentimental humor. "Look, Kiy," he said, pointing to the moon, which had
just risen behind the lime trees—"how exquisite! Veslovsky, this is the time for a
serenade. You know, he has a splendid voice; we practiced songs together along
the road. He has brought some lovely songs with him, two new ones. Varvara
Andreevna and he must sing some duets."
When the party had broken up, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked a long while
about the avenue with Veslovsky; their voices could be heard singing one of the
new songs.
Levin hearing these voices sat scowling in an easy-chair in his wife’s bedroom, and maintained an obstinate silence when she asked him what was wrong.
But when at last with a timid glance she hazarded the question: "Was there perhaps something you disliked about Veslovsky?"—it all burst out, and he told her
all. He was humiliated himself at what he was saying, and that exasperated him
all the more.
He stood facing her with his eyes gliering menacingly under his scowling brows, and he squeezed his strong arms across his chest, as though he were
straining every nerve to hold himself in. e expression of his face would have
been grim, and even cruel, if it had not at the same time had a look of suﬀering
which touched her. His jaws were twitching, and his voice kept breaking.
"You must understand that I’m not jealous, that’s a nasty word. I can’t be
jealous, and believe that…. I can’t say what I feel, but this is awful…. I’m not
jealous, but I’m wounded, humiliated that anybody dare think, that anybody dare
look at you with eyes like that."
"Eyes like what?" said Kiy, trying as conscientiously as possible to recall
every word and gesture of that evening and every shade implied in them.
At the very boom of her heart she did think there had been something
precisely at the moment when he had crossed over aer her to the other end of

dxvi
the table; but she dared not own it even to herself, and would have been even
more unable to bring herself to say so to him, and so increase his suﬀering.
"And what can there possibly be aractive about me as I am now?…"
"Ah!" he cried, clutching at his head, "you shouldn’t say that!… If you had
been aractive then…"
"Oh, no, Kostya, oh, wait a minute, oh, do listen!" she said, looking at him
with an expression of pained commiseration. "Why, what can you be thinking
about! When for me there’s no one in the world, no one, no one!… Would you
like me never to see anyone?"
For the ﬁrst minute she had been oﬀended at his jealousy; she was angry
that the slightest amusement, even the most innocent, should be forbidden her;
but now she would readily have sacriﬁced, not merely such triﬂes, but everything,
for his peace of mind, to save him from the agony he was suﬀering.
"You must understand the horror and comedy of my position," he went on
in a desperate whisper; "that he’s in my house, that he’s done nothing improper
positively except his free and easy airs and the way he sits on his legs. He thinks
it’s the best possible form, and so I’m obliged to be civil to him."
"But, Kostya, you’re exaggerating," said Kiy, at the boom of her heart
rejoicing at the depth of his love for her, shown now in his jealousy.
"e most awful part of it all is that you’re just as you always are, and
especially now when to me you’re something sacred, and we’re so happy, so particularly happy—and all of a sudden a lile wretch…. He’s not a lile wretch;
why should I abuse him? I have nothing to do with him. But why should my, and
your, happiness…"
"Do you know, I understand now what it’s all come from," Kiy was beginning.
"Well, what? what?"
"I saw how you looked while we were talking at supper."
"Well, well!" Levin said in dismay.
She told him what they had been talking about. And as she told him, she
was breathless with emotion. Levin was silent for a space, then he scanned her
pale and distressed face, and suddenly he clutched at his head.
"Katya, I’ve been worrying you! Darling, forgive me! It’s madness! Katya,
I’m a criminal. And how could you be so distressed at such idiocy?"
"Oh, I was sorry for you."
"For me? for me? How mad I am!… But why make you miserable? It’s
awful to think that any outsider can shaer our happiness."
"It’s humiliating too, of course."
"Oh, then I’ll keep him here all the summer, and will overwhelm him with
civility," said Levin, kissing her hands. "You shall see. Tomorrow…. Oh, yes, we

dxvii
are going tomorrow."

Chapter 
Next day, before the ladies were up, the wagonee and a trap for the shooting
party were at the door, and Laska, aware since early morning that they were going
shooting, aer much whining and darting to and fro, had sat herself down in the
wagonee beside the coachman, and, disapproving of the delay, was excitedly
watching the door from which the sportsmen still did not come out. e ﬁrst to
come out was Vassenka Veslovsky, in new high boots that reached half-way up
his thick thighs, in a green blouse, with a new Russian leather cartridge-belt, and
in his Scotch cap with ribbons, with a brand-new English gun without a sling.
Laska ﬂew up to him, welcomed him, and jumping up, asked him in her own
way whether the others were coming soon, but geing no answer from him, she
returned to her post of observation and sank into repose again, her head on one
side, and one ear pricked up to listen. At last the door opened with a creak, and
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s spot-and-tan pointer Krak ﬂew out, running round and
round and turning over in the air. Stepan Arkadyevitch himself followed with a
gun in his hand and a cigar in his mouth.
"Good dog, good dog, Krak!" he cried encouragingly to the dog, who put his
paws up on his chest, catching at his game bag. Stepan Arkadyevitch was dressed
in rough leggings and spats, in torn trousers and a short coat. On his head there
was a wreck of a hat of indeﬁnite form, but his gun of a new patent was a perfect
gem, and his game bag and cartridge belt, though worn, were of the very best
quality.
Vassenka Veslovsky had had no notion before that it was truly ic for a
sportsman to be in taers, but to have his shooting outﬁt of the best quality. He
saw it now as he looked at Stepan Arkadyevitch, radiant in his rags, graceful,
well-fed, and joyous, a typical Russian nobleman. And he made up his mind that
next time he went shooting he would certainly adopt the same get-up.
"Well, and what about our host?" he asked.
"A young wife," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.
"Yes, and such a charming one!"
"He came down dressed. No doubt he’s run up to her again."
Stepan Arkadyevitch guessed right. Levin had run up again to his wife to
ask her once more if she forgave him for his idiocy yesterday, and, moreover, to
beg her for Christ’s sake to be more careful. e great thing was for her to keep
away from the children—they might any minute push against her. en he had
once more to hear her declare that she was not angry with him for going away for

dxviii
two days, and to beg her to be sure to send him a note next morning by a servant
on horseback, to write him, if it were but two words only, to let him know that all
was well with her.
Kiy was distressed, as she always was, at parting for a couple of days
from her husband, but when she saw his eager ﬁgure, looking big and strong
in his shooting-boots and his white blouse, and a sort of sportsman elation and
excitement incomprehensible to her, she forgot her own chagrin for the sake of
his pleasure, and said good-bye to him cheerfully.
"Pardon, gentlemen!" he said, running out onto the steps. "Have you put
the lunch in? Why is the chestnut on the right? Well, it doesn’t maer. Laska,
down; go and lie down!"
"Put it with the herd of oxen," he said to the herdsman, who was waiting for
him at the steps with some question. "Excuse me, here comes another villain."
Levin jumped out of the wagonee, in which he had already taken his seat,
to meet the carpenter, who came towards the steps with a rule in his hand.
"You didn’t come to the counting house yesterday, and now you’re detaining
me. Well, what is it?"
"Would your honor let me make another turning? It’s only three steps to
add. And we make it just ﬁt at the same time. It will be much more convenient."
"You should have listened to me," Levin answered with annoyance. "I said:
Put the lines and then ﬁt in the steps. Now there’s no seing it right. Do as I told
you, and make a new staircase."
e point was that in the lodge that was being built the carpenter had
spoiled the staircase, ﬁing it together without calculating the space it was to
ﬁll, so that the steps were all sloping when it was put in place. Now the carpenter
wanted, keeping the same staircase, to add three steps.
"It will be much beer."
"But where’s your staircase coming out with its three steps?"
"Why, upon my word, sir," the carpenter said with a contemptuous smile. "It
comes out right at the very spot. It starts, so to speak," he said, with a persuasive
gesture; "it comes down, and comes down, and comes out."
"But three steps will add to the length too … where is it to come out?"
"Why, to be sure, it’ll start from the boom and go up and go up, and come
out so," the carpenter said obstinately and convincingly.
"It’ll reach the ceiling and the wall."
"Upon my word! Why, it’ll go up, and up, and come out like this."
Levin took out a ramrod and began sketching him the staircase in the dust.
"ere, do you see?"
"As your honor likes," said the carpenter, with a sudden gleam in his eyes,
obviously understanding the thing at last. "It seems it’ll be best to make a new

dxix
one."
"Well, then, do it as you’re told," Levin shouted, seating himself in the wagonee. "Down! Hold the dogs, Philip!"
Levin felt now at leaving behind all his family and household cares such
an eager sense of joy in life and expectation that he was not disposed to talk.
Besides that, he had that feeling of concentrated excitement that every sportsman
experiences as he approaches the scene of action. If he had anything on his mind
at that moment, it was only the doubt whether they would start anything in the
Kolpensky marsh, whether Laska would show to advantage in comparison with
Krak, and whether he would shoot well that day himself. Not to disgrace himself
before a new spectator—not to be outdone by Oblonsky—that too was a thought
that crossed his brain.
Oblonsky was feeling the same, and he too was not talkative. Vassenka
Veslovsky kept up alone a ceaseless ﬂow of cheerful chaer. As he listened to
him now, Levin felt ashamed to think how unfair he had been to him the day
before. Vassenka was really a nice fellow, simple, good-hearted, and very goodhumored. If Levin had met him before he was married, he would have made
friends with him. Levin rather disliked his holiday aitude to life and a sort of
free and easy assumption of elegance. It was as though he assumed a high degree
of importance in himself that could not be disputed, because he had long nails
and a stylish cap, and everything else to correspond; but this could be forgiven
for the sake of his good nature and good breeding. Levin liked him for his good
education, for speaking French and English with such an excellent accent, and for
being a man of his world.
Vassenka was extremely delighted with the le horse, a horse of the Don
Steppes. He kept praising him enthusiastically. "How ﬁne it must be galloping
over the steppes on a steppe horse! Eh? isn’t it?" he said. He had imagined riding
on a steppe horse as something wild and romantic, and it turned out nothing of
the sort. But his simplicity, particularly in conjunction with his good looks, his
amiable smile, and the grace of his movements, was very aractive. Either because
his nature was sympathetic to Levin, or because Levin was trying to atone for his
sins of the previous evening by seeing nothing but what was good in him, anyway
he liked his society.
Aer they had driven over two miles from home, Veslovsky all at once felt
for a cigar and his pocketbook, and did not know whether he had lost them or le
them on the table. In the pocketbook there were thirty-seven pounds, and so the
maer could not be le in uncertainty.
"Do you know what, Levin, I’ll gallop home on that le trace-horse. at
will be splendid. Eh?" he said, preparing to get out.
"No, why should you?" answered Levin, calculating that Vassenka could

dxx
hardly weigh less than seventeen stone. "I’ll send the coachman."
e coachman rode back on the trace-horse, and Levin himself drove the
remaining pair.

Chapter 
"Well, now what’s our plan of campaign? Tell us all about it," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Our plan is this. Now we’re driving to Gvozdyov. In Gvozdyov there’s a
grouse marsh on this side, and beyond Gvozdyov come some magniﬁcent snipe
marshes where there are grouse too. It’s hot now, and we’ll get there—it’s ﬁeen
miles or so—towards evening and have some evening shooting; we’ll spend the
night there and go on tomorrow to the bigger moors."
"And is there nothing on the way?"
"Yes; but we’ll reserve ourselves; besides it’s hot. ere are two nice lile
places, but I doubt there being anything to shoot."
Levin would himself have liked to go into these lile places, but they
were near home; he could shoot them over any time, and they were only lile
places—there would hardly be room for three to shoot. And so, with some insincerity, he said that he doubted there being anything to shoot. When they reached
a lile marsh Levin would have driven by, but Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the
experienced eye of a sportsman, at once detected reeds visible from the road.
"Shan’t we try that?" he said, pointing to the lile marsh.
"Levin, do, please! how delightful!" Vassenka Veslovsky began begging, and
Levin could but consent.
Before they had time to stop, the dogs had ﬂown one before the other into
the marsh.
"Krak! Laska!…"
e dogs came back.
"ere won’t be room for three. I’ll stay here," said Levin, hoping they would
ﬁnd nothing but peewits, who had been startled by the dogs, and turning over in
their ﬂight, were plaintively wailing over the marsh.
"No! Come along, Levin, let’s go together!" Veslovsky called.
"Really, there’s not room. Laska, back, Laska! You won’t want another dog,
will you?"
Levin remained with the wagonee, and looked enviously at the sportsmen.
ey walked right across the marsh. Except lile birds and peewits, of which
Vassenka killed one, there was nothing in the marsh.
"Come, you see now that it was not that I grudged the marsh," said Levin,

dxxi
"only it’s wasting time."
"Oh, no, it was jolly all the same. Did you see us?" said Vassenka Veslovsky,
clambering awkwardly into the wagonee with his gun and his peewit in his
hands. "How splendidly I shot this bird! Didn’t I? Well, shall we soon be geing
to the real place?"
e horses started oﬀ suddenly, Levin knocked his head against the stock
of someone’s gun, and there was the report of a shot. e gun did actually go oﬀ
ﬁrst, but that was how it seemed to Levin. It appeared that Vassenka Veslovsky
had pulled only one trigger, and had le the other hammer still cocked. e charge
ﬂew into the ground without doing harm to anyone. Stepan Arkadyevitch shook
his head and laughed reprovingly at Veslovsky. But Levin had not the heart to
reprove him. In the ﬁrst place, any reproach would have seemed to be called forth
by the danger he had incurred and the bump that had come up on Levin’s forehead.
And besides, Veslovsky was at ﬁrst so naïvely distressed, and then laughed so
good-humoredly and infectiously at their general dismay, that one could not but
laugh with him.
When they reached the second marsh, which was fairly large, and would
inevitably take some time to shoot over, Levin tried to persuade them to pass it
by. But Veslovsky again overpersuaded him. Again, as the marsh was narrow,
Levin, like a good host, remained with the carriage.
Krak made straight for some clumps of sedge. Vassenka Veslovsky was the
ﬁrst to run aer the dog. Before Stepan Arkadyevitch had time to come up, a
grouse ﬂew out. Veslovsky missed it and it ﬂew into an unmown meadow. is
grouse was le for Veslovsky to follow up. Krak found it again and pointed, and
Veslovsky shot it and went back to the carriage. "Now you go and I’ll stay with
the horses," he said.
Levin had begun to feel the pangs of a sportsman’s envy. He handed the
reins to Veslovsky and walked into the marsh.
Laska, who had been plaintively whining and freing against the injustice
of her treatment, ﬂew straight ahead to a hopeful place that Levin knew well, and
that Krak had not yet come upon.
"Why don’t you stop her?" shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"She won’t scare them," answered Levin, sympathizing with his bitch’s pleasure and hurrying aer her.
As she came nearer and nearer to the familiar breeding places there was
more and more earnestness in Laska’s exploration. A lile marsh bird did not
divert her aention for more than an instant. She made one circuit round the
clump of reeds, was beginning a second, and suddenly quivered with excitement
and became motionless.
"Come, come, Stiva!" shouted Levin, feeling his heart beginning to beat

dxxii
more violently; and all of a sudden, as though some sort of shuer had been drawn
back from his straining ears, all sounds, confused but loud, began to beat on his
hearing, losing all sense of distance. He heard the steps of Stepan Arkadyevitch,
mistaking them for the tramp of the horses in the distance; he heard the brile
sound of the twigs on which he had trodden, taking this sound for the ﬂying of
a grouse. He heard too, not far behind him, a splashing in the water, which he
could not explain to himself.
Picking his steps, he moved up to the dog.
"Fetch it!"
Not a grouse but a snipe ﬂew up from beside the dog. Levin had lied his
gun, but at the very instant when he was taking aim, the sound of splashing grew
louder, came closer, and was joined with the sound of Veslovsky’s voice, shouting
something with strange loudness. Levin saw he had his gun pointed behind the
snipe, but still he ﬁred.
When he had made sure he had missed, Levin looked round and saw the
horses and the wagonee not on the road but in the marsh.
Veslovsky, eager to see the shooting, had driven into the marsh, and got the
horses stuck in the mud.
"Damn the fellow!" Levin said to himself, as he went back to the carriage
that had sunk in the mire. "What did you drive in for?" he said to him dryly, and
calling the coachman, he began pulling the horses out.
Levin was vexed both at being hindered from shooting and at his horses
geing stuck in the mud, and still more at the fact that neither Stepan Arkadyevitch nor Veslovsky helped him and the coachman to unharness the horses and get
them out, since neither of them had the slightest notion of harnessing. Without
vouchsaﬁng a syllable in reply to Vassenka’s protestations that it had been quite
dry there, Levin worked in silence with the coachman at extricating the horses.
But then, as he got warm at the work and saw how assiduously Veslovsky was
tugging at the wagonee by one of the mud-guards, so that he broke it indeed,
Levin blamed himself for having under the inﬂuence of yesterday’s feelings been
too cold to Veslovsky, and tried to be particularly genial so as to smooth over
his chilliness. When everything had been put right, and the carriage had been
brought back to the road, Levin had the lunch served.
"Bon appétit—bonne conscience! Ce poulet va tomber jusqu’au fond de mes
boes," Vassenka, who had recovered his spirits, quoted the French saying as he
ﬁnished his second chicken. "Well, now our troubles are over, now everything’s
going to go well. Only, to atone for my sins, I’m bound to sit on the box. at’s
so? eh? No, no! I’ll be your Automedon. You shall see how I’ll get you along,"
he answered, not leing go the rein, when Levin begged him to let the coachman
drive. "No, I must atone for my sins, and I’m very comfortable on the box." And

dxxiii
he drove.
Levin was a lile afraid he would exhaust the horses, especially the chestnut, whom he did not know how to hold in; but unconsciously he fell under the
inﬂuence of his gaiety and listened to the songs he sang all the way on the box,
or the descriptions and representations he gave of driving in the English fashion,
four-in-hand; and it was in the very best of spirits that aer lunch they drove to
the Gvozdyov marsh.

Chapter 
Vassenka drove the horses so smartly that they reached the marsh too early, while
it was still hot.
As they drew near this more important marsh, the chief aim of their expedition, Levin could not help considering how he could get rid of Vassenka and
be free in his movements. Stepan Arkadyevitch evidently had the same desire,
and on his face Levin saw the look of anxiety always present in a true sportsman
when beginning shooting, together with a certain good-humored slyness peculiar
to him.
"How shall we go? It’s a splendid marsh, I see, and there are hawks," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointing to two great birds hovering over the reeds. "Where
there are hawks, there is sure to be game."
"Now, gentlemen," said Levin, pulling up his boots and examining the lock
of his gun with rather a gloomy expression, "do you see those reeds?" He pointed
to an oasis of blackish green in the huge half-mown wet meadow that stretched
along the right bank of the river. "e marsh begins here, straight in front of us,
do you see—where it is greener? From here it runs to the right where the horses
are; there are breeding places there, and grouse, and all round those reeds as far
as that alder, and right up to the mill. Over there, do you see, where the pools
are? at’s the best place. ere I once shot seventeen snipe. We’ll separate with
the dogs and go in diﬀerent directions, and then meet over there at the mill."
"Well, which shall go to le and which to right?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"It’s wider to the right; you two go that way and I’ll take the le," he said with
apparent carelessness.
"Capital! we’ll make the bigger bag! Yes, come along, come along!"
Vassenka exclaimed.
Levin could do nothing but agree, and they divided.
As soon as they entered the marsh, the two dogs began hunting about together and made towards the green, slime-covered pool. Levin knew Laska’s
method, wary and indeﬁnite; he knew the place too and expected a whole covey

dxxiv
of snipe.
"Veslovsky, beside me, walk beside me!" he said in a faint voice to his companion splashing in the water behind him. Levin could not help feeling an interest in the direction his gun was pointed, aer that casual shot near the Kolpensky
marsh.
"Oh, I won’t get in your way, don’t trouble about me."
But Levin could not help troubling, and recalled Kiy’s words at parting:
"Mind you don’t shoot one another." e dogs came nearer and nearer, passed
each other, each pursuing its own scent. e expectation of snipe was so intense
that to Levin the squelching sound of his own heel, as he drew it up out of the
mire, seemed to be the call of a snipe, and he clutched and pressed the lock of his
gun.
"Bang! bang!" sounded almost in his ear. Vassenka had ﬁred at a ﬂock of
ducks which was hovering over the marsh and ﬂying at that moment towards the
sportsmen, far out of range. Before Levin had time to look round, there was the
whir of one snipe, another, a third, and some eight more rose one aer another.
Stepan Arkadyevitch hit one at the very moment when it was beginning its
zigzag movements, and the snipe fell in a heap into the mud. Oblonsky aimed
deliberately at another, still ﬂying low in the reeds, and together with the report
of the shot, that snipe too fell, and it could be seen ﬂuering out where the sedge
had been cut, its unhurt wing showing white beneath.
Levin was not so lucky: he aimed at his ﬁrst bird too low, and missed; he
aimed at it again, just as it was rising, but at that instant another snipe ﬂew up at
his very feet, distracting him so that he missed again.
While they were loading their guns, another snipe rose, and Veslovsky, who
had had time to load again, sent two charges of small-shot into the water. Stepan
Arkadyevitch picked up his snipe, and with sparkling eyes looked at Levin.
"Well, now let us separate," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and limping on his
le foot, holding his gun in readiness and whistling to his dog, he walked oﬀ in
one direction. Levin and Veslovsky walked in the other.
It always happened with Levin that when his ﬁrst shots were a failure he
got hot and out of temper, and shot badly the whole day. So it was that day.
e snipe showed themselves in numbers. ey kept ﬂying up from just under
the dogs, from under the sportsmen’s legs, and Levin might have retrieved his ill
luck. But the more he shot, the more he felt disgraced in the eyes of Veslovsky,
who kept popping away merrily and indiscriminately, killing nothing, and not in
the slightest abashed by his ill success. Levin, in feverish haste, could not restrain
himself, got more and more out of temper, and ended by shooting almost without
a hope of hiing. Laska, indeed, seemed to understand this. She began looking
more languidly, and gazed back at the sportsmen, as it were, with perplexity or

dxxv
reproach in her eyes. Shots followed shots in rapid succession. e smoke of
the powder hung about the sportsmen, while in the great roomy net of the game
bag there were only three light lile snipe. And of these one had been killed by
Veslovsky alone, and one by both of them together. Meanwhile from the other
side of the marsh came the sound of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s shots, not frequent,
but, as Levin fancied, well-directed, for almost aer each they heard "Krak, Krak,
apporte!"
is excited Levin still more. e snipe were ﬂoating continually in the air
over the reeds. eir whirring wings close to the earth, and their harsh cries high
in the air, could be heard on all sides; the snipe that had risen ﬁrst and ﬂown up
into the air, seled again before the sportsmen. Instead of two hawks there were
now dozens of them hovering with shrill cries over the marsh.
Aer walking through the larger half of the marsh, Levin and Veslovsky
reached the place where the peasants’ mowing-grass was divided into long strips
reaching to the reeds, marked oﬀ in one place by the trampled grass, in another
by a path mown through it. Half of these strips had already been mown.
ough there was not so much hope of ﬁnding birds in the uncut part as the
cut part, Levin had promised Stepan Arkadyevitch to meet him, and so he walked
on with his companion through the cut and uncut patches.
"Hi, sportsmen!" shouted one of a group of peasants, siing on an unharnessed cart; "come and have some lunch with us! Have a drop of wine!"
Levin looked round.
"Come along, it’s all right!" shouted a good-humored-looking bearded peasant with a red face, showing his white teeth in a grin, and holding up a greenish
bole that ﬂashed in the sunlight.
"’est-ce qu’ils disent?" asked Veslovsky.
"ey invite you to have some vodka. Most likely they’ve been dividing the
meadow into lots. I should have some," said Levin, not without some guile, hoping
Veslovsky would be tempted by the vodka, and would go away to them.
"Why do they oﬀer it?"
"Oh, they’re merry-making. Really, you should join them. You would be
interested."
"Allons, c’est curieux."
"You go, you go, you’ll ﬁnd the way to the mill!" cried Levin, and looking round he perceived with satisfaction that Veslovsky, bent and stumbling with
weariness, holding his gun out at arm’s length, was making his way out of the
marsh towards the peasants.
"You come too!" the peasants shouted to Levin. "Never fear! You taste our
cake!"
Levin felt a strong inclination to drink a lile vodka and to eat some bread.

dxxvi
He was exhausted, and felt it a great eﬀort to drag his staggering legs out of the
mire, and for a minute he hesitated. But Laska was seing. And immediately all
his weariness vanished, and he walked lightly through the swamp towards the
dog. A snipe ﬂew up at his feet; he ﬁred and killed it. Laska still pointed.—"Fetch
it!" Another bird ﬂew up close to the dog. Levin ﬁred. But it was an unlucky day
for him; he missed it, and when he went to look for the one he had shot, he could
not ﬁnd that either. He wandered all about the reeds, but Laska did not believe he
had shot it, and when he sent her to ﬁnd it, she pretended to hunt for it, but did
not really. And in the absence of Vassenka, on whom Levin threw the blame of
his failure, things went no beer. ere were plenty of snipe still, but Levin made
one miss aer another.
e slanting rays of the sun were still hot; his clothes, soaked through with
perspiration, stuck to his body; his le boot full of water weighed heavily on his
leg and squeaked at every step; the sweat ran in drops down his powder-grimed
face, his mouth was full of the bier taste, his nose of the smell of powder and
stagnant water, his ears were ringing with the incessant whir of the snipe; he
could not touch the stock of his gun, it was so hot; his heart beat with short,
rapid throbs; his hands shook with excitement, and his weary legs stumbled and
staggered over the hillocks and in the swamp, but still he walked on and still he
shot. At last, aer a disgraceful miss, he ﬂung his gun and his hat on the ground.
"No, I must control myself," he said to himself. Picking up his gun and his
hat, he called Laska, and went out of the swamp. When he got on to dry ground
he sat down, pulled oﬀ his boot and emptied it, then walked to the marsh, drank
some stagnant-tasting water, moistened his burning hot gun, and washed his face
and hands. Feeling refreshed, he went back to the spot where a snipe had seled,
ﬁrmly resolved to keep cool.
He tried to be calm, but it was the same again. His ﬁnger pressed the cock
before he had taken a good aim at the bird. It got worse and worse.
He had only ﬁve birds in his game-bag when he walked out of the marsh
towards the alders where he was to rejoin Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Before he caught sight of Stepan Arkadyevitch he saw his dog. Krak darted
out from behind the twisted root of an alder, black all over with the stinking mire
of the marsh, and with the air of a conqueror sniﬀed at Laska. Behind Krak there
came into view in the shade of the alder tree the shapely ﬁgure of Stepan Arkadyevitch. He came to meet him, red and perspiring, with unbuoned neckband, still
limping in the same way.
"Well? You have been popping away!" he said, smiling good-humoredly.
"How have you got on?" queried Levin. But there was no need to ask, for
he had already seen the full game bag.
"Oh, prey fair."

dxxvii
He had fourteen birds.
"A splendid marsh! I’ve no doubt Veslovsky got in your way. It’s awkward
too, shooting with one dog," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, to soen his triumph.

Chapter 
When Levin and Stepan Arkadyevitch reached the peasant’s hut where Levin always used to stay, Veslovsky was already there. He was siing in the middle of
the hut, clinging with both hands to the bench from which he was being pulled
by a soldier, the brother of the peasant’s wife, who was helping him oﬀ with his
miry boots. Veslovsky was laughing his infectious, good-humored laugh.
"I’ve only just come. Ils ont été armants. Just fancy, they gave me drink,
fed me! Such bread, it was exquisite! Delicieux! And the vodka, I never tasted
any beer. And they would not take a penny for anything. And they kept saying:
‘Excuse our homely ways.’"
"What should they take anything for? ey were entertaining you, to be
sure. Do you suppose they keep vodka for sale?" said the soldier, succeeding at
last in pulling the soaked boot oﬀ the blackened stocking.
In spite of the dirtiness of the hut, which was all muddied by their boots and
the ﬁlthy dogs licking themselves clean, and the smell of marsh mud and powder
that ﬁlled the room, and the absence of knives and forks, the party drank their tea
and ate their supper with a relish only known to sportsmen. Washed and clean,
they went into a hay-barn swept ready for them, where the coachman had been
making up beds for the gentlemen.
ough it was dusk, not one of them wanted to go to sleep.
Aer wavering among reminiscences and anecdotes of guns, of dogs, and
of former shooting parties, the conversation rested on a topic that interested all
of them. Aer Vassenka had several times over expressed his appreciation of this
delightful sleeping place among the fragrant hay, this delightful broken cart (he
supposed it to be broken because the shas had been taken out), of the good nature
of the peasants that had treated him to vodka, of the dogs who lay at the feet of
their respective masters, Oblonsky began telling them of a delightful shooting
party at Malthus’s, where he had stayed the previous summer.
Malthus was a well-known capitalist, who had made his money by speculation in railway shares. Stepan Arkadyevitch described what grouse moors this
Malthus had bought in the Tver province, and how they were preserved, and of
the carriages and dogcarts in which the shooting party had been driven, and the
luncheon pavilion that had been rigged up at the marsh.
"I don’t understand you," said Levin, siing up in the hay; "how is it such

dxxviii
people don’t disgust you? I can understand a lunch with Laﬁe is all very pleasant, but don’t you dislike just that very sumptuousness? All these people, just
like our spirit monopolists in old days, get their money in a way that gains them
the contempt of everyone. ey don’t care for their contempt, and then they use
their dishonest gains to buy oﬀ the contempt they have deserved."
"Perfectly true!" chimed in Vassenka Veslovsky. "Perfectly! Oblonsky, of
course, goes out of bonhomie, but other people say: ‘Well, Oblonsky stays with
them.’…"
"Not a bit of it." Levin could hear that Oblonsky was smiling as he spoke. "I
simply don’t consider him more dishonest than any other wealthy merchant or
nobleman. ey’ve all made their money alike—by their work and their intelligence."
"Oh, by what work? Do you call it work to get hold of concessions and
speculate with them?"
"Of course it’s work. Work in this sense, that if it were not for him and
others like him, there would have been no railways."
"But that’s not work, like the work of a peasant or a learned profession."
"Granted, but it’s work in the sense that his activity produces a result—the
railways. But of course you think the railways useless."
"No, that’s another question; I am prepared to admit that they’re useful. But
all proﬁt that is out of proportion to the labor expended is dishonest."
"But who is to deﬁne what is proportionate?"
"Making proﬁt by dishonest means, by trickery," said Levin, conscious that
he could not draw a distinct line between honesty and dishonesty. "Such as banking, for instance," he went on. "It’s an evil—the amassing of huge fortunes without labor, just the same thing as with the spirit monopolies, it’s only the form
that’s changed. Le roi est mort, vive le roi. No sooner were the spirit monopolies
abolished than the railways came up, and banking companies; that, too, is proﬁt
without work."
"Yes, that may all be very true and clever…. Lie down, Krak!" Stepan
Arkadyevitch called to his dog, who was scratching and turning over all the hay.
He was obviously convinced of the correctness of his position, and so talked
serenely and without haste. "But you have not drawn the line between honest
and dishonest work. at I receive a bigger salary than my chief clerk, though he
knows more about the work than I do—that’s dishonest, I suppose?"
"I can’t say."
"Well, but I can tell you: your receiving some ﬁve thousand, let’s say, for
your work on the land, while our host, the peasant here, however hard he works,
can never get more than ﬁy roubles, is just as dishonest as my earning more
than my chief clerk, and Malthus geing more than a station-master. No, quite

dxxix
the contrary; I see that society takes up a sort of antagonistic aitude to these
people, which is uerly baseless, and I fancy there’s envy at the boom of it…."
"No, that’s unfair," said Veslovsky; "how could envy come in? ere is something not nice about that sort of business."
"You say," Levin went on, "that it’s unjust for me to receive ﬁve thousand,
while the peasant has ﬁy; that’s true. It is unfair, and I feel it, but…"
"It really is. Why is it we spend our time riding, drinking, shooting, doing
nothing, while they are forever at work?" said Vassenka Veslovsky, obviously for
the ﬁrst time in his life reﬂecting on the question, and consequently considering
it with perfect sincerity.
"Yes, you feel it, but you don’t give him your property," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, intentionally, as it seemed, provoking Levin.
ere had arisen of late something like a secret antagonism between the
two brothers-in-law; as though, since they had married sisters, a kind of rivalry
had sprung up between them as to which was ordering his life best, and now this
hostility showed itself in the conversation, as it began to take a personal note.
"I don’t give it away, because no one demands that from me, and if I wanted
to, I could not give it away," answered Levin, "and have no one to give it to."
"Give it to this peasant, he would not refuse it."
"Yes, but how am I to give it up? Am I to go to him and make a deed of
conveyance?"
"I don’t know; but if you are convinced that you have no right…"
"I’m not at all convinced. On the contrary, I feel I have no right to give it
up, that I have duties both to the land and to my family."
"No, excuse me, but if you consider this inequality is unjust, why is it you
don’t act accordingly?…"
"Well, I do act negatively on that idea, so far as not trying to increase the
diﬀerence of position existing between him and me."
"No, excuse me, that’s a paradox."
"Yes, there’s something of a sophistry about that," Veslovsky agreed. "Ah!
our host; so you’re not asleep yet?" he said to the peasant who came into the barn,
opening the creaking door. "How is it you’re not asleep?"
"No, how’s one to sleep! I thought our gentlemen would be asleep, but I
heard them chaering. I want to get a hook from here. She won’t bite?" he added,
stepping cautiously with his bare feet.
"And where are you going to sleep?"
"We are going out for the night with the beasts."
"Ah, what a night!" said Veslovsky, looking out at the edge of the hut and
the unharnessed wagonee that could be seen in the faint light of the evening
glow in the great frame of the open doors. "But listen, there are women’s voices

dxxx
singing, and, on my word, not badly too. Who’s that singing, my friend?"
"at’s the maids from hard by here."
"Let’s go, let’s have a walk! We shan’t go to sleep, you know. Oblonsky,
come along!"
"If one could only do both, lie here and go," answered Oblonsky, stretching.
"It’s capital lying here."
"Well, I shall go by myself," said Veslovsky, geing up eagerly, and puing
on his shoes and stockings. "Good-bye, gentlemen. If it’s fun, I’ll fetch you. You’ve
treated me to some good sport, and I won’t forget you."
"He really is a capital fellow, isn’t he?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, when
Veslovsky had gone out and the peasant had closed the door aer him.
"Yes, capital," answered Levin, still thinking of the subject of their conversation just before. It seemed to him that he had clearly expressed his thoughts
and feelings to the best of his capacity, and yet both of them, straightforward
men and not fools, had said with one voice that he was comforting himself with
sophistries. is disconcerted him.
"It’s just this, my dear boy. One must do one of two things: either admit
that the existing order of society is just, and then stick up for one’s rights in it;
or acknowledge that you are enjoying unjust privileges, as I do, and then enjoy
them and be satisﬁed."
"No, if it were unjust, you could not enjoy these advantages and be satisﬁed—at least I could not. e great thing for me is to feel that I’m not to blame."
"What do you say, why not go aer all?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, evidently weary of the strain of thought. "We shan’t go to sleep, you know. Come,
let’s go!"
Levin did not answer. What they had said in the conversation, that he acted
justly only in a negative sense, absorbed his thoughts. "Can it be that it’s only
possible to be just negatively?" he was asking himself.
"How strong the smell of the fresh hay is, though," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
geing up. "ere’s not a chance of sleeping. Vassenka has been geing up some
fun there. Do you hear the laughing and his voice? Hadn’t we beer go? Come
along!"
"No, I’m not coming," answered Levin.
"Surely that’s not a maer of principle too," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling, as he felt about in the dark for his cap.
"It’s not a maer of principle, but why should I go?"
"But do you know you are preparing trouble for yourself," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, ﬁnding his cap and geing up.
"How so?"
"Do you suppose I don’t see the line you’ve taken up with your wife? I

dxxxi
heard how it’s a question of the greatest consequence, whether or not you’re to
be away for a couple of days’ shooting. at’s all very well as an idyllic episode,
but for your whole life that won’t answer. A man must be independent; he has
his masculine interests. A man has to be manly," said Oblonsky, opening the door.
"In what way? To go running aer servant girls?" said Levin.
"Why not, if it amuses him? Ça ne tire pas a consequence. It won’t do my
wife any harm, and it’ll amuse me. e great thing is to respect the sanctity of
the home. ere should be nothing in the home. But don’t tie your own hands."
"Perhaps so," said Levin dryly, and he turned on his side. "Tomorrow, early,
I want to go shooting, and I won’t wake anyone, and shall set oﬀ at daybreak."
"Messieurs, venez vite!" they heard the voice of Veslovsky coming back.
"Charmante! I’ve made such a discovery. Charmante! a perfect Gretchen, and
I’ve already made friends with her. Really, exceedingly prey," he declared in a
tone of approval, as though she had been made prey entirely on his account, and
he was expressing his satisfaction with the entertainment that had been provided
for him.
Levin pretended to be asleep, while Oblonsky, puing on his slippers, and
lighting a cigar, walked out of the barn, and soon their voices were lost.
For a long while Levin could not get to sleep. He heard the horses munching
hay, then he heard the peasant and his elder boy geing ready for the night, and
going oﬀ for the night watch with the beasts, then he heard the soldier arranging
his bed on the other side of the barn, with his nephew, the younger son of their
peasant host. He heard the boy in his shrill lile voice telling his uncle what
he thought about the dogs, who seemed to him huge and terrible creatures, and
asking what the dogs were going to hunt next day, and the soldier in a husky,
sleepy voice, telling him the sportsmen were going in the morning to the marsh,
and would shoot with their guns; and then, to check the boy’s questions, he said,
"Go to sleep, Vaska; go to sleep, or you’ll catch it," and soon aer he began snoring
himself, and everything was still. He could only hear the snort of the horses, and
the guural cry of a snipe.
"Is it really only negative?" he repeated to himself. "Well, what of it? It’s
not my fault." And he began thinking about the next day.
"Tomorrow I’ll go out early, and I’ll make a point of keeping cool. ere
are lots of snipe; and there are grouse too. When I come back there’ll be the
note from Kiy. Yes, Stiva may be right, I’m not manly with her, I’m tied to her
apron-strings…. Well, it can’t be helped! Negative again…."
Half asleep, he heard the laughter and mirthful talk of Veslovsky and Stepan
Arkadyevitch. For an instant he opened his eyes: the moon was up, and in the
open doorway, brightly lighted up by the moonlight, they were standing talking.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying something of the freshness of one girl, com-

dxxxii
paring her to a freshly peeled nut, and Veslovsky with his infectious laugh was
repeating some words, probably said to him by a peasant: "Ah, you do your best
to get round her!" Levin, half asleep, said:
"Gentlemen, tomorrow before daylight!" and fell asleep.

Chapter 
Waking up at earliest dawn, Levin tried to wake his companions. Vassenka, lying
on his stomach, with one leg in a stocking thrust out, was sleeping so soundly
that he could elicit no response. Oblonsky, half asleep, declined to get up so early.
Even Laska, who was asleep, curled up in the hay, got up unwillingly, and lazily
stretched out and straightened her hind legs one aer the other. Geing on his
boots and stockings, taking his gun, and carefully opening the creaking door of
the barn, Levin went out into the road. e coachmen were sleeping in their
carriages, the horses were dozing. Only one was lazily eating oats, dipping its
nose into the manger. It was still gray out-of-doors.
"Why are you up so early, my dear?" the old woman, their hostess, said,
coming out of the hut and addressing him aﬀectionately as an old friend.
"Going shooting, granny. Do I go this way to the marsh?"
"Straight out at the back; by our threshing ﬂoor, my dear, and hemp patches;
there’s a lile footpath." Stepping carefully with her sunburnt, bare feet, the old
woman conducted Levin, and moved back the fence for him by the threshing ﬂoor.
"Straight on and you’ll come to the marsh. Our lads drove the cale there
yesterday evening."
Laska ran eagerly forward along the lile path. Levin followed her with a
light, rapid step, continually looking at the sky. He hoped the sun would not be up
before he reached the marsh. But the sun did not delay. e moon, which had been
bright when he went out, by now shone only like a crescent of quicksilver. e
pink ﬂush of dawn, which one could not help seeing before, now had to be sought
to be discerned at all. What were before undeﬁned, vague blurs in the distant
countryside could now be distinctly seen. ey were sheaves of rye. e dew,
not visible till the sun was up, weed Levin’s legs and his blouse above his belt in
the high growing, fragrant hemp patch, from which the pollen had already fallen
out. In the transparent stillness of morning the smallest sounds were audible. A
bee ﬂew by Levin’s ear with the whizzing sound of a bullet. He looked carefully,
and saw a second and a third. ey were all ﬂying from the beehives behind the
hedge, and they disappeared over the hemp patch in the direction of the marsh.
e path led straight to the marsh. e marsh could be recognized by the mist
which rose from it, thicker in one place and thinner in another, so that the reeds

dxxxiii
and willow bushes swayed like islands in this mist. At the edge of the marsh and
the road, peasant boys and men, who had been herding for the night, were lying,
and in the dawn all were asleep under their coats. Not far from them were three
hobbled horses. One of them clanked a chain. Laska walked beside her master,
pressing a lile forward and looking round. Passing the sleeping peasants and
reaching the ﬁrst reeds, Levin examined his pistols and let his dog oﬀ. One of the
horses, a sleek, dark-brown three-year-old, seeing the dog, started away, switched
its tail and snorted. e other horses too were frightened, and splashing through
the water with their hobbled legs, and drawing their hoofs out of the thick mud
with a squelching sound, they bounded out of the marsh. Laska stopped, looking
ironically at the horses and inquiringly at Levin. Levin paed Laska, and whistled
as a sign that she might begin.
Laska ran joyfully and anxiously through the slush that swayed under her.
Running into the marsh among the familiar scents of roots, marsh plants,
and slime, and the extraneous smell of horse dung, Laska detected at once a smell
that pervaded the whole marsh, the scent of that strong-smelling bird that always
excited her more than any other. Here and there among the moss and marsh plants
this scent was very strong, but it was impossible to determine in which direction
it grew stronger or fainter. To ﬁnd the direction, she had to go farther away from
the wind. Not feeling the motion of her legs, Laska bounded with a stiﬀ gallop,
so that at each bound she could stop short, to the right, away from the wind that
blew from the east before sunrise, and turned facing the wind. Sniﬃng in the air
with dilated nostrils, she felt at once that not their tracks only but they themselves
were here before her, and not one, but many. Laska slackened her speed. ey
were here, but where precisely she could not yet determine. To ﬁnd the very spot,
she began to make a circle, when suddenly her master’s voice drew her oﬀ. "Laska!
here?" he asked, pointing her to a diﬀerent direction. She stopped, asking him if
she had beer not go on doing as she had begun. But he repeated his command
in an angry voice, pointing to a spot covered with water, where there could not
be anything. She obeyed him, pretending she was looking, so as to please him,
went round it, and went back to her former position, and was at once aware of
the scent again. Now when he was not hindering her, she knew what to do, and
without looking at what was under her feet, and to her vexation stumbling over
a high stump into the water, but righting herself with her strong, supple legs, she
began making the circle which was to make all clear to her. e scent of them
reached her, stronger and stronger, and more and more deﬁned, and all at once it
became perfectly clear to her that one of them was here, behind this tu of reeds,
ﬁve paces in front of her; she stopped, and her whole body was still and rigid. On
her short legs she could see nothing in front of her, but by the scent she knew it
was siing not more than ﬁve paces oﬀ. She stood still, feeling more and more

dxxxiv
conscious of it, and enjoying it in anticipation. Her tail was stretched straight
and tense, and only wagging at the extreme end. Her mouth was slightly open,
her ears raised. One ear had been turned wrong side out as she ran up, and she
breathed heavily but warily, and still more warily looked round, but more with
her eyes than her head, to her master. He was coming along with the face she
knew so well, though the eyes were always terrible to her. He stumbled over the
stump as he came, and moved, as she thought, extraordinarily slowly. She thought
he came slowly, but he was running.
Noticing Laska’s special aitude as she crouched on the ground, as it were,
scratching big prints with her hind paws, and with her mouth slightly open, Levin
knew she was pointing at grouse, and with an inward prayer for luck, especially
with the ﬁrst bird, he ran up to her. Coming quite close up to her, he could from
his height look beyond her, and he saw with his eyes what she was seeing with
her nose. In a space between two lile thickets, at a couple of yards’ distance, he
could see a grouse. Turning its head, it was listening. en lightly preening and
folding its wings, it disappeared round a corner with a clumsy wag of its tail.
"Fetch it, fetch it!" shouted Levin, giving Laska a shove from behind.
"But I can’t go," thought Laska. "Where am I to go? From here I feel them,
but if I move forward I shall know nothing of where they are or who they are."
But then he shoved her with his knee, and in an excited whisper said, "Fetch it,
Laska."
"Well, if that’s what he wishes, I’ll do it, but I can’t answer for myself now,"
she thought, and darted forward as fast as her legs would carry her between the
thick bushes. She scented nothing now; she could only see and hear, without
understanding anything.
Ten paces from her former place a grouse rose with a guural cry and the
peculiar round sound of its wings. And immediately aer the shot it splashed
heavily with its white breast on the wet mire. Another bird did not linger, but
rose behind Levin without the dog. When Levin turned towards it, it was already
some way oﬀ. But his shot caught it. Flying twenty paces further, the second
grouse rose upwards, and whirling round like a ball, dropped heavily on a dry
place.
"Come, this is going to be some good!" thought Levin, packing the warm
and fat grouse into his game bag. "Eh, Laska, will it be good?"
When Levin, aer loading his gun, moved on, the sun had fully risen, though
unseen behind the storm-clouds. e moon had lost all of its luster, and was like
a white cloud in the sky. Not a single star could be seen. e sedge, silvery with
dew before, now shone like gold. e stagnant pools were all like amber. e
blue of the grass had changed to yellow-green. e marsh birds twiered and
swarmed about the brook and upon the bushes that gliered with dew and cast

dxxxv
long shadows. A hawk woke up and seled on a haycock, turning its head from
side to side and looking discontentedly at the marsh. Crows were ﬂying about the
ﬁeld, and a bare-legged boy was driving the horses to an old man, who had got
up from under his long coat and was combing his hair. e smoke from the gun
was white as milk over the green of the grass.
One of the boys ran up to Levin.
"Uncle, there were ducks here yesterday!" he shouted to him, and he walked
a lile way oﬀ behind him.
And Levin was doubly pleased, in sight of the boy, who expressed his approval, at killing three snipe, one aer another, straight oﬀ.

Chapter 
e sportsman’s saying, that if the ﬁrst beast or the ﬁrst bird is not missed, the
day will be lucky, turned out correct.
At ten o’clock Levin, weary, hungry, and happy aer a tramp of twenty
miles, returned to his night’s lodging with nineteen head of ﬁne game and one
duck, which he tied to his belt, as it would not go into the game bag. His companions had long been awake, and had had time to get hungry and have breakfast.
"Wait a bit, wait a bit, I know there are nineteen," said Levin, counting a
second time over the grouse and snipe, that looked so much less important now,
bent and dry and bloodstained, with heads crooked aside, than they did when they
were ﬂying.
e number was veriﬁed, and Stepan Arkadyevitch’s envy pleased Levin.
He was pleased too on returning to ﬁnd the man sent by Kiy with a note was
already there.
"I am perfectly well and happy. If you were uneasy about me, you can feel
easier than ever. I’ve a new bodyguard, Marya Vlasyevna,"—this was the midwife,
a new and important personage in Levin’s domestic life. "She has come to have a
look at me. She found me perfectly well, and we have kept her till you are back.
All are happy and well, and please, don’t be in a hurry to come back, but, if the
sport is good, stay another day."
ese two pleasures, his lucky shooting and the leer from his wife, were
so great that two slightly disagreeable incidents passed lightly over Levin. One
was that the chestnut trace horse, who had been unmistakably overworked on
the previous day, was oﬀ his feed and out of sorts. e coachman said he was
"Overdriven yesterday, Konstantin Dmitrievitch. Yes, indeed! driven ten miles
with no sense!"
e other unpleasant incident, which for the ﬁrst minute destroyed his good

dxxxvi
humor, though later he laughed at it a great deal, was to ﬁnd that of all the provisions Kiy had provided in such abundance that one would have thought there
was enough for a week, nothing was le. On his way back, tired and hungry
from shooting, Levin had so distinct a vision of meat-pies that as he approached
the hut he seemed to smell and taste them, as Laska had smelt the game, and he
immediately told Philip to give him some. It appeared that there were no pies le,
nor even any chicken.
"Well, this fellow’s appetite!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing and pointing at Vassenka Veslovsky. "I never suﬀer from loss of appetite, but he’s really
marvelous!…"
"Well, it can’t be helped," said Levin, looking gloomily at Veslovsky. "Well,
Philip, give me some beef, then."
"e bee’s been eaten, and the bones given to the dogs," answered Philip.
Levin was so hurt that he said, in a tone of vexation, "You might have le
me something!" and he felt ready to cry.
"en put away the game," he said in a shaking voice to Philip, trying not
to look at Vassenka, "and cover them with some neles. And you might at least
ask for some milk for me."
But when he had drunk some milk, he felt ashamed immediately at having
shown his annoyance to a stranger, and he began to laugh at his hungry mortiﬁcation.
In the evening they went shooting again, and Veslovsky had several successful shots, and in the night they drove home.
eir homeward journey was as lively as their drive out had been.
Veslovsky sang songs and related with enjoyment his adventures with the peasants, who had regaled him with vodka, and said to him, "Excuse our homely ways,"
and his night’s adventures with kiss-in-the-ring and the servant-girl and the peasant, who had asked him was he married, and on learning that he was not, said to
him, "Well, mind you don’t run aer other men’s wives—you’d beer get one of
your own." ese words had particularly amused Veslovsky.
"Altogether, I’ve enjoyed our outing awfully. And you, Levin?"
"I have, very much," Levin said quite sincerely. It was particularly delightful to him to have got rid of the hostility he had been feeling towards Vassenka
Veslovsky at home, and to feel instead the most friendly disposition to him.

Chapter 
Next day at ten o’clock Levin, who had already gone his rounds, knocked at the
room where Vassenka had been put for the night.

dxxxvii
"Entrez!" Veslovsky called to him. "Excuse me, I’ve only just ﬁnished my
ablutions," he said, smiling, standing before him in his underclothes only.
"Don’t mind me, please." Levin sat down in the window. "Have you slept
well?"
"Like the dead. What sort of day is it for shooting?"
"What will you take, tea or coﬀee?"
"Neither. I’ll wait till lunch. I’m really ashamed. I suppose the ladies are
down? A walk now would be capital. You show me your horses."
Aer walking about the garden, visiting the stable, and even doing some
gymnastic exercises together on the parallel bars, Levin returned to the house
with his guest, and went with him into the drawing room.
"We had splendid shooting, and so many delightful experiences!" said
Veslovsky, going up to Kiy, who was siing at the samovar. "What a pity ladies
are cut oﬀ from these delights!"
"Well, I suppose he must say something to the lady of the house," Levin said
to himself. Again he fancied something in the smile, in the all-conquering air with
which their guest addressed Kiy….
e princess, siing on the other side of the table with Marya Vlasyevna
and Stepan Arkadyevitch, called Levin to her side, and began to talk to him about
moving to Moscow for Kiy’s conﬁnement, and geing ready rooms for them.
Just as Levin had disliked all the trivial preparations for his wedding, as derogatory to the grandeur of the event, now he felt still more oﬀensive the preparations
for the approaching birth, the date of which they reckoned, it seemed, on their
ﬁngers. He tried to turn a deaf ear to these discussions of the best paerns of
long clothes for the coming baby; tried to turn away and avoid seeing the mysterious, endless strips of kniing, the triangles of linen, and so on, to which Dolly
aached special importance. e birth of a son (he was certain it would be a son)
which was promised him, but which he still could not believe in—so marvelous it
seemed—presented itself to his mind, on one hand, as a happiness so immense, and
therefore so incredible; on the other, as an event so mysterious, that this assumption of a deﬁnite knowledge of what would be, and consequent preparation for it,
as for something ordinary that did happen to people, jarred on him as confusing
and humiliating.
But the princess did not understand his feelings, and put down his reluctance to think and talk about it to carelessness and indiﬀerence, and so she gave
him no peace. She had commissioned Stepan Arkadyevitch to look at a ﬂat, and
now she called Levin up.
"I know nothing about it, princess. Do as you think ﬁt," he said.
"You must decide when you will move."
"I really don’t know. I know millions of children are born away from

dxxxviii
Moscow, and doctors … why…"
"But if so…"
"Oh, no, as Kiy wishes."
"We can’t talk to Kiy about it! Do you want me to frighten her? Why, this
spring Natalia Golitzina died from having an ignorant doctor."
"I will do just what you say," he said gloomily.
e princess began talking to him, but he did not hear her. ough the
conversation with the princess had indeed jarred upon him, he was gloomy, not
on account of that conversation, but from what he saw at the samovar.
"No, it’s impossible," he thought, glancing now and then at Vassenka bending over Kiy, telling her something with his charming smile, and at her, ﬂushed
and disturbed.
ere was something not nice in Vassenka’s aitude, in his eyes, in his smile.
Levin even saw something not nice in Kiy’s aitude and look. And again the
light died away in his eyes. Again, as before, all of a sudden, without the slightest
transition, he felt cast down from a pinnacle of happiness, peace, and dignity, into
an abyss of despair, rage, and humiliation. Again everything and everyone had
become hateful to him.
"You do just as you think best, princess," he said again, looking round.
"Heavy is the cap of Monomach," Stepan Arkadyevitch said playfully, hinting, evidently, not simply at the princess’s conversation, but at the cause of Levin’s
agitation, which he had noticed.
"How late you are today, Dolly!"
Everyone got up to greet Darya Alexandrovna. Vassenka only rose for an
instant, and with the lack of courtesy to ladies characteristic of the modern young
man, he scarcely bowed, and resumed his conversation again, laughing at something.
"I’ve been worried about Masha. She did not sleep well, and is dreadfully
tiresome today," said Dolly.
e conversation Vassenka had started with Kiy was running on the same
lines as on the previous evening, discussing Anna, and whether love is to be put
higher than worldly considerations. Kiy disliked the conversation, and she was
disturbed both by the subject and the tone in which it was conducted, and also by
the knowledge of the eﬀect it would have on her husband. But she was too simple
and innocent to know how to cut short this conversation, or even to conceal the
superﬁcial pleasure aﬀorded her by the young man’s very obvious admiration.
She wanted to stop it, but she did not know what to do. Whatever she did she
knew would be observed by her husband, and the worst interpretation put on it.
And, in fact, when she asked Dolly what was wrong with Masha, and Vassenka,
waiting till this uninteresting conversation was over, began to gaze indiﬀerently at

dxxxix
Dolly, the question struck Levin as an unnatural and disgusting piece of hypocrisy.
"What do you say, shall we go and look for mushrooms today?" said Dolly.
"By all means, please, and I shall come too," said Kiy, and she blushed. She
wanted from politeness to ask Vassenka whether he would come, and she did not
ask him. "Where are you going, Kostya?" she asked her husband with a guilty
face, as he passed by her with a resolute step. is guilty air conﬁrmed all his
suspicions.
"e mechanician came when I was away; I haven’t seen him yet," he said,
not looking at her.
He went downstairs, but before he had time to leave his study he heard his
wife’s familiar footsteps running with reckless speed to him.
"What do you want?" he said to her shortly. "We are busy."
"I beg your pardon," she said to the German mechanician; "I want a few
words with my husband."
e German would have le the room, but Levin said to him:
"Don’t disturb yourself."
"e train is at three?" queried the German. "I mustn’t be late."
Levin did not answer him, but walked out himself with his wife.
"Well, what have you to say to me?" he said to her in French.
He did not look her in the face, and did not care to see that she in her
condition was trembling all over, and had a piteous, crushed look.
"I … I want to say that we can’t go on like this; that this is misery…" she
said.
"e servants are here at the sideboard," he said angrily; "don’t make a
scene."
"Well, let’s go in here!"
ey were standing in the passage. Kiy would have gone into the next
room, but there the English governess was giving Tanya a lesson.
"Well, come into the garden."
In the garden they came upon a peasant weeding the path. And no longer
considering that the peasant could see her tear-stained and his agitated face, that
they looked like people ﬂeeing from some disaster, they went on with rapid steps,
feeling that they must speak out and clear up misunderstandings, must be alone
together, and so get rid of the misery they were both feeling.
"We can’t go on like this! It’s misery! I am wretched; you are wretched.
What for?" she said, when they had at last reached a solitary garden seat at a turn
in the lime tree avenue.
"But tell me one thing: was there in his tone anything unseemly, not nice,
humiliatingly horrible?" he said, standing before her again in the same position
with his clenched ﬁsts on his chest, as he had stood before her that night.

dxl
"Yes," she said in a shaking voice; "but, Kostya, surely you see I’m not to
blame? All the morning I’ve been trying to take a tone … but such people…. Why
did he come? How happy we were!" she said, breathless with the sobs that shook
her.
Although nothing had been pursuing them, and there was nothing to run
away from, and they could not possibly have found anything very delightful on
that garden seat, the gardener saw with astonishment that they passed him on
their way home with comforted and radiant faces.

Chapter 
Aer escorting his wife upstairs, Levin went to Dolly’s part of the house. Darya
Alexandrovna, for her part, was in great distress too that day. She was walking
about the room, talking angrily to a lile girl, who stood in the corner roaring.
"And you shall stand all day in the corner, and have your dinner all alone,
and not see one of your dolls, and I won’t make you a new frock," she said, not
knowing how to punish her.
"Oh, she is a disgusting child!" she turned to Levin. "Where does she get
such wicked propensities?"
"Why, what has she done?" Levin said without much interest, for he had
wanted to ask her advice, and so was annoyed that he had come at an unlucky
moment.
"Grisha and she went into the raspberries, and there … I can’t tell you really
what she did. It’s a thousand pities Miss Elliot’s not with us. is one sees to
nothing—she’s a machine…. Figurez-vous que la petite?…"
And Darya Alexandrovna described Masha’s crime.
"at proves nothing; it’s not a question of evil propensities at all, it’s simply
mischief," Levin assured her.
"But you are upset about something? What have you come for?" asked
Dolly. "What’s going on there?"
And in the tone of her question Levin heard that it would be easy for him
to say what he had meant to say.
"I’ve not been in there, I’ve been alone in the garden with Kiy. We’ve had
a quarrel for the second time since … Stiva came."
Dolly looked at him with her shrewd, comprehending eyes.
"Come, tell me, honor bright, has there been … not in Kiy, but in that
gentleman’s behavior, a tone which might be unpleasant—not unpleasant, but
horrible, oﬀensive to a husband?"
"You mean, how shall I say…. Stay, stay in the corner!" she said to Masha,

dxli
who, detecting a faint smile in her mother’s face, had been turning round. "e
opinion of the world would be that he is behaving as young men do behave. Il fait
la cour à une jeune et jolie femme, and a husband who’s a man of the world should
only be ﬂaered by it."
"Yes, yes," said Levin gloomily; "but you noticed it?"
"Not only I, but Stiva noticed it. Just aer breakfast he said to me in so many
words, Je crois que Veslovsky fait un petit brin de cour à Kiy."
"Well, that’s all right then; now I’m satisﬁed. I’ll send him away," said Levin.
"What do you mean! Are you crazy?" Dolly cried in horror; "nonsense,
Kostya, only think!" she said, laughing. "You can go now to Fanny," she said to
Masha. "No, if you wish it, I’ll speak to Stiva. He’ll take him away. He can say
you’re expecting visitors. Altogether he doesn’t ﬁt into the house."
"No, no, I’ll do it myself."
"But you’ll quarrel with him?"
"Not a bit. I shall so enjoy it," Levin said, his eyes ﬂashing with real enjoyment. "Come, forgive her, Dolly, she won’t do it again," he said of the lile sinner,
who had not gone to Fanny, but was standing irresolutely before her mother,
waiting and looking up from under her brows to catch her mother’s eye.
e mother glanced at her. e child broke into sobs, hid her face on her
mother’s lap, and Dolly laid her thin, tender hand on her head.
"And what is there in common between us and him?" thought Levin, and he
went oﬀ to look for Veslovsky.
As he passed through the passage he gave orders for the carriage to be got
ready to drive to the station.
"e spring was broken yesterday," said the footman.
"Well, the covered trap, then, and make haste. Where’s the visitor?"
"e gentleman’s gone to his room."
Levin came upon Veslovsky at the moment when the laer, having unpacked his things from his trunk, and laid out some new songs, was puing on
his gaiters to go out riding.
Whether there was something exceptional in Levin’s face, or that Vassenka
was himself conscious that ce petit brin de cour he was making was out of place
in this family, but he was somewhat (as much as a young man in society can be)
disconcerted at Levin’s entrance.
"You ride in gaiters?"
"Yes, it’s much cleaner," said Vassenka, puing his fat leg on a chair, fastening the boom hook, and smiling with simple-hearted good humor.
He was undoubtedly a good-natured fellow, and Levin felt sorry for him and
ashamed of himself, as his host, when he saw the shy look on Vassenka’s face.
On the table lay a piece of stick which they had broken together that morn-

dxlii
ing, trying their strength. Levin took the fragment in his hands and began smashing it up, breaking bits oﬀ the stick, not knowing how to begin.
"I wanted…." He paused, but suddenly, remembering Kiy and everything
that had happened, he said, looking him resolutely in the face: "I have ordered
the horses to be put-to for you."
"How so?" Vassenka began in surprise. "To drive where?"
"For you to drive to the station," Levin said gloomily.
"Are you going away, or has something happened?"
"It happens that I expect visitors," said Levin, his strong ﬁngers more and
more rapidly breaking oﬀ the ends of the split stick. "And I’m not expecting visitors, and nothing has happened, but I beg you to go away. You can explain my
rudeness as you like."
Vassenka drew himself up.
"I beg you to explain…" he said with dignity, understanding at last.
"I can’t explain," Levin said soly and deliberately, trying to control the
trembling of his jaw; "and you’d beer not ask."
And as the split ends were all broken oﬀ, Levin clutched the thick ends in
his ﬁnger, broke the stick in two, and carefully caught the end as it fell.
Probably the sight of those nervous ﬁngers, of the muscles he had proved
that morning at gymnastics, of the gliering eyes, the so voice, and quivering
jaws, convinced Vassenka beer than any words. He bowed, shrugging his shoulders, and smiling contemptuously.
"Can I not see Oblonsky?"
e shrug and the smile did not irritate Levin.
"What else was there for him to do?" he thought.
"I’ll send him to you at once."
"What madness is this?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said when, aer hearing from
his friend that he was being turned out of the house, he found Levin in the garden,
where he was walking about waiting for his guest’s departure. "Mais c’est ridicule!
What ﬂy has stung you? Mais c’est du dernier ridicule! What did you think, if a
young man…"
But the place where Levin had been stung was evidently still sore, for he
turned pale again, when Stepan Arkadyevitch would have enlarged on the reason,
and he himself cut him short.
"Please don’t go into it! I can’t help it. I feel ashamed of how I’m treating
you and him. But it won’t be, I imagine, a great grief to him to go, and his presence
was distasteful to me and to my wife."
"But it’s insulting to him! Et puis c’est ridicule."
"And to me it’s both insulting and distressing! And I’m not at fault in any
way, and there’s no need for me to suﬀer."

dxliii
"Well, this I didn’t expect of you! On peut être jaloux, mais à ce point, c’est
du dernier ridicule!"
Levin turned quickly, and walked away from him into the depths of the
avenue, and he went on walking up and down alone. Soon he heard the rumble of
the trap, and saw from behind the trees how Vassenka, siing in the hay (unluckily
there was no seat in the trap) in his Scotch cap, was driven along the avenue,
jolting up and down over the ruts.
"What’s this?" Levin thought, when a footman ran out of the house and
stopped the trap. It was the mechanician, whom Levin had totally forgoen. e
mechanician, bowing low, said something to Veslovsky, then clambered into the
trap, and they drove oﬀ together.
Stepan Arkadyevitch and the princess were much upset by Levin’s action. And he himself felt not only in the highest degree ridicule, but also uerly
guilty and disgraced. But remembering what suﬀerings he and his wife had been
through, when he asked himself how he should act another time, he answered
that he should do just the same again.
In spite of all this, towards the end of that day, everyone except the princess,
who could not pardon Levin’s action, became extraordinarily lively and good humored, like children aer a punishment or grown-up people aer a dreary, ceremonious reception, so that by the evening Vassenka’s dismissal was spoken of,
in the absence of the princess, as though it were some remote event. And Dolly,
who had inherited her father’s gi of humorous storytelling, made Varenka helpless with laughter as she related for the third and fourth time, always with fresh
humorous additions, how she had only just put on her new shoes for the beneﬁt
of the visitor, and on going into the drawing room, heard suddenly the rumble
of the trap. And who should be in the trap but Vassenka himself, with his Scotch
cap, and his songs and his gaiters, and all, siing in the hay.
"If only you’d ordered out the carriage! But no! and then I hear: ‘Stop!’ Oh,
I thought they’ve relented. I look out, and behold a fat German being sat down
by him and driving away…. And my new shoes all for nothing!…"

Chapter 
Darya Alexandrovna carried out her intention and went to see Anna. She was
sorry to annoy her sister and to do anything Levin disliked. She quite understood
how right the Levins were in not wishing to have anything to do with Vronsky.
But she felt she must go and see Anna, and show her that her feelings could not
be changed, in spite of the change in her position. at she might be independent
of the Levins in this expedition, Darya Alexandrovna sent to the village to hire

dxliv
horses for the drive; but Levin learning of it went to her to protest.
"What makes you suppose that I dislike your going? But, even if I did dislike
it, I should still more dislike your not taking my horses," he said. "You never told
me that you were going for certain. Hiring horses in the village is disagreeable to
me, and, what’s of more importance, they’ll undertake the job and never get you
there. I have horses. And if you don’t want to wound me, you’ll take mine."
Darya Alexandrovna had to consent, and on the day ﬁxed Levin had ready
for his sister-in-law a set of four horses and relays, geing them together from
the farm- and saddle-horses—not at all a smart-looking set, but capable of taking
Darya Alexandrovna the whole distance in a single day. At that moment, when
horses were wanted for the princess, who was going, and for the midwife, it was
a diﬃcult maer for Levin to make up the number, but the duties of hospitality
would not let him allow Darya Alexandrovna to hire horses when staying in his
house. Moreover, he was well aware that the twenty roubles that would be asked
for the journey were a serious maer for her; Darya Alexandrovna’s pecuniary
aﬀairs, which were in a very unsatisfactory state, were taken to heart by the Levins
as if they were their own.
Darya Alexandrovna, by Levin’s advice, started before daybreak. e road
was good, the carriage comfortable, the horses troed along merrily, and on the
box, besides the coachman, sat the counting-house clerk, whom Levin was sending instead of a groom for greater security. Darya Alexandrovna dozed and waked
up only on reaching the inn where the horses were to be changed.
Aer drinking tea at the same well-to-do peasant’s with whom Levin had
stayed on the way to Sviazhsky’s, and chaing with the women about their children, and with the old man about Count Vronsky, whom the laer praised very
highly, Darya Alexandrovna, at ten o’clock, went on again. At home, looking after her children, she had no time to think. So now, aer this journey of four hours,
all the thoughts she had suppressed before rushed swarming into her brain, and
she thought over all her life as she never had before, and from the most diﬀerent
points of view. Her thoughts seemed strange even to herself. At ﬁrst she thought
about the children, about whom she was uneasy, although the princess and Kiy
(she reckoned more upon her) had promised to look aer them. "If only Masha
does not begin her naughty tricks, if Grisha isn’t kicked by a horse, and Lily’s
stomach isn’t upset again!" she thought. But these questions of the present were
succeeded by questions of the immediate future. She began thinking how she had
to get a new ﬂat in Moscow for the coming winter, to renew the drawing room
furniture, and to make her elder girl a cloak. en questions of the more remote
future occurred to her: how she was to place her children in the world. "e girls
are all right," she thought; "but the boys?"
"It’s very well that I’m teaching Grisha, but of course that’s only because

dxlv
I am free myself now, I’m not with child. Stiva, of course, there’s no counting
on. And with the help of good-natured friends I can bring them up; but if there’s
another baby coming?…" And the thought struck her how untruly it was said that
the curse laid on woman was that in sorrow she should bring forth children.
"e birth itself, that’s nothing; but the months of carrying the child—that’s
what’s so intolerable," she thought, picturing to herself her last pregnancy, and
the death of the last baby. And she recalled the conversation she had just had
with the young woman at the inn. On being asked whether she had any children,
the handsome young woman had answered cheerfully:
"I had a girl baby, but God set me free; I buried her last Lent."
"Well, did you grieve very much for her?" asked Darya Alexandrovna.
"Why grieve? e old man has grandchildren enough as it is. It was only a
trouble. No working, nor nothing. Only a tie."
is answer had struck Darya Alexandrovna as revolting in spite of the
good-natured and pleasing face of the young woman; but now she could not help
recalling these words. In those cynical words there was indeed a grain of truth.
"Yes, altogether," thought Darya Alexandrovna, looking back over her whole
existence during those ﬁeen years of her married life, "pregnancy, sickness, mental incapacity, indiﬀerence to everything, and most of all—hideousness. Kiy,
young and prey as she is, even Kiy has lost her looks; and I when I’m with
child become hideous, I know it. e birth, the agony, the hideous agonies, that
last moment … then the nursing, the sleepless nights, the fearful pains…."
Darya Alexandrovna shuddered at the mere recollection of the pain from
sore breasts which she had suﬀered with almost every child. "en the children’s
illnesses, that everlasting apprehension; then bringing them up; evil propensities"
(she thought of lile Masha’s crime among the raspberries), "education, Latin—it’s
all so incomprehensible and diﬃcult. And on the top of it all, the death of these
children." And there rose again before her imagination the cruel memory, that
always tore her mother’s heart, of the death of her last lile baby, who had died
of croup; his funeral, the callous indiﬀerence of all at the lile pink coﬃn, and her
own torn heart, and her lonely anguish at the sight of the pale lile brow with its
projecting temples, and the open, wondering lile mouth seen in the coﬃn at the
moment when it was being covered with the lile pink lid with a cross braided
on it.
"And all this, what’s it for? What is to come of it all? at I’m wasting my
life, never having a moment’s peace, either with child, or nursing a child, forever
irritable, peevish, wretched myself and worrying others, repulsive to my husband,
while the children are growing up unhappy, badly educated, and penniless. Even
now, if it weren’t for spending the summer at the Levins’, I don’t know how we
should be managing to live. Of course Kostya and Kiy have so much tact that

dxlvi
we don’t feel it; but it can’t go on. ey’ll have children, they won’t be able to
keep us; it’s a drag on them as it is. How is papa, who has hardly anything le for
himself, to help us? So that I can’t even bring the children up by myself, and may
ﬁnd it hard with the help of other people, at the cost of humiliation. Why, even if
we suppose the greatest good luck, that the children don’t die, and I bring them
up somehow. At the very best they’ll simply be decent people. at’s all I can
hope for. And to gain simply that—what agonies, what toil!… One’s whole life
ruined!" Again she recalled what the young peasant woman had said, and again
she was revolted at the thought; but she could not help admiing that there was
a grain of brutal truth in the words.
"Is it far now, Mihail?" Darya Alexandrovna asked the counting house clerk,
to turn her mind from thoughts that were frightening her.
"From this village, they say, it’s ﬁve miles." e carriage drove along the
village street and onto a bridge. On the bridge was a crowd of peasant women
with coils of ties for the sheaves on their shoulders, gaily and noisily chaering. ey stood still on the bridge, staring inquisitively at the carriage. All the
faces turned to Darya Alexandrovna looked to her healthy and happy, making
her envious of their enjoyment of life. "ey’re all living, they’re all enjoying
life," Darya Alexandrovna still mused when she had passed the peasant women
and was driving uphill again at a trot, seated comfortably on the so springs of
the old carriage, "while I, let out, as it were from prison, from the world of worries
that fret me to death, am only looking about me now for an instant. ey all live;
those peasant women and my sister Natalia and Varenka and Anna, whom I am
going to see—all, but not I.
"And they aack Anna. What for? am I any beer? I have, anyway, a
husband I love—not as I should like to love him, still I do love him, while Anna
never loved hers. How is she to blame? She wants to live. God has put that in our
hearts. Very likely I should have done the same. Even to this day I don’t feel sure I
did right in listening to her at that terrible time when she came to me in Moscow.
I ought then to have cast oﬀ my husband and have begun my life fresh. I might
have loved and have been loved in reality. And is it any beer as it is? I don’t
respect him. He’s necessary to me," she thought about her husband, "and I put up
with him. Is that any beer? At that time I could still have been admired, I had
beauty le me still," Darya Alexandrovna pursued her thoughts, and she would
have liked to look at herself in the looking glass. She had a traveling looking
glass in her handbag, and she wanted to take it out; but looking at the backs of
the coachman and the swaying counting house clerk, she felt that she would be
ashamed if either of them were to look round, and she did not take out the glass.
But without looking in the glass, she thought that even now it was not too
late; and she thought of Sergey Ivanovitch, who was always particularly aentive

dxlvii
to her, of Stiva’s good-hearted friend, Turovtsin, who had helped her nurse her
children through the scarlatina, and was in love with her. And there was someone else, a quite young man, who—her husband had told her it as a joke—thought
her more beautiful than either of her sisters. And the most passionate and impossible romances rose before Darya Alexandrovna’s imagination. "Anna did quite
right, and certainly I shall never reproach her for it. She is happy, she makes another person happy, and she’s not broken down as I am, but most likely just as
she always was, bright, clever, open to every impression," thought Darya Alexandrovna,—and a sly smile curved her lips, for, as she pondered on Anna’s love
aﬀair, Darya Alexandrovna constructed on parallel lines an almost identical love
aﬀair for herself, with an imaginary composite ﬁgure, the ideal man who was in
love with her. She, like Anna, confessed the whole aﬀair to her husband. And the
amazement and perplexity of Stepan Arkadyevitch at this avowal made her smile.
In such daydreams she reached the turning of the highroad that led to Vozdvizhenskoe.

Chapter 
e coachman pulled up his four horses and looked round to the right, to a ﬁeld
of rye, where some peasants were siing on a cart. e counting house clerk was
just going to jump down, but on second thoughts he shouted peremptorily to the
peasants instead, and beckoned to them to come up. e wind, that seemed to
blow as they drove, dropped when the carriage stood still; gadﬂies seled on the
steaming horses that angrily shook them oﬀ. e metallic clank of a whetstone
against a scythe, that came to them from the cart, ceased. One of the peasants got
up and came towards the carriage.
"Well, you are slow!" the counting house clerk shouted angrily to the peasant who was stepping slowly with his bare feet over the ruts of the rough dry
road. "Come along, do!"
A curly-headed old man with a bit of bast tied round his hair, and his bent
back dark with perspiration, came towards the carriage, quickening his steps, and
took hold of the mud-guard with his sunburnt hand.
"Vozdvizhenskoe, the manor house? the count’s?" he repeated; "go on to
the end of this track. en turn to the le. Straight along the avenue and you’ll
come right upon it. But whom do you want? e count himsel?"
"Well, are they at home, my good man?" Darya Alexandrovna said vaguely,
not knowing how to ask about Anna, even of this peasant.
"At home for sure," said the peasant, shiing from one bare foot to the other,
and leaving a distinct print of ﬁve toes and a heel in the dust. "Sure to be at home,"

dxlviii
he repeated, evidently eager to talk. "Only yesterday visitors arrived. ere’s a
sight of visitors come. What do you want?" He turned round and called to a lad,
who was shouting something to him from the cart. "Oh! ey all rode by here
not long since, to look at a reaping machine. ey’ll be home by now. And who
will you be belonging to?…"
"We’ve come a long way," said the coachman, climbing onto the box. "So
it’s not far?"
"I tell you, it’s just here. As soon as you get out…" he said, keeping hold all
the while of the carriage.
A healthy-looking, broad-shouldered young fellow came up too.
"What, is it laborers they want for the harvest?" he asked.
"I don’t know, my boy."
"So you keep to the le, and you’ll come right on it," said the peasant, unmistakably loth to let the travelers go, and eager to converse.
e coachman started the horses, but they were only just turning oﬀ when
the peasant shouted: "Stop! Hi, friend! Stop!" called the two voices. e coachman stopped.
"ey’re coming! ey’re yonder!" shouted the peasant. "See what a turnout!" he said, pointing to four persons on horseback, and two in a ar-à-banc,
coming along the road.
ey were Vronsky with a jockey, Veslovsky and Anna on horseback, and
Princess Varvara and Sviazhsky in the ar-à-banc. ey had gone out to look at
the working of a new reaping machine.
When the carriage stopped, the party on horseback were coming at a walking pace. Anna was in front beside Veslovsky. Anna, quietly walking her horse, a
sturdy English cob with cropped mane and short tail, her beautiful head with her
black hair straying loose under her high hat, her full shoulders, her slender waist
in her black riding habit, and all the ease and grace of her deportment, impressed
Dolly.
For the ﬁrst minute it seemed to her unsuitable for Anna to be on horseback. e conception of riding on horseback for a lady was, in Darya Alexandrovna’s mind, associated with ideas of youthful ﬂirtation and frivolity, which, in
her opinion, was unbecoming in Anna’s position. But when she had scrutinized
her, seeing her closer, she was at once reconciled to her riding. In spite of her
elegance, everything was so simple, quiet, and digniﬁed in the aitude, the dress
and the movements of Anna, that nothing could have been more natural.
Beside Anna, on a hot-looking gray cavalry horse, was Vassenka Veslovsky
in his Scotch cap with ﬂoating ribbons, his stout legs stretched out in front, obviously pleased with his own appearance. Darya Alexandrovna could not suppress
a good-humored smile as she recognized him. Behind rode Vronsky on a dark

dxlix
bay mare, obviously heated from galloping. He was holding her in, pulling at the
reins.
Aer him rode a lile man in the dress of a jockey. Sviazhsky and Princess
Varvara in a new ar-à-banc with a big, raven-black troing horse, overtook the
party on horseback.
Anna’s face suddenly beamed with a joyful smile at the instant when, in
the lile ﬁgure huddled in a corner of the old carriage, she recognized Dolly. She
uered a cry, started in the saddle, and set her horse into a gallop. On reaching
the carriage she jumped oﬀ without assistance, and holding up her riding habit,
she ran up to greet Dolly.
"I thought it was you and dared not think it. How delightful! You can’t
fancy how glad I am!" she said, at one moment pressing her face against Dolly
and kissing her, and at the next holding her oﬀ and examining her with a smile.
"Here’s a delightful surprise, Alexey!" she said, looking round at Vronsky,
who had dismounted, and was walking towards them.
Vronsky, taking oﬀ his tall gray hat, went up to Dolly.
"You wouldn’t believe how glad we are to see you," he said, giving peculiar
signiﬁcance to the words, and showing his strong white teeth in a smile.
Vassenka Veslovsky, without geing oﬀ his horse, took oﬀ his cap and
greeted the visitor by gleefully waving the ribbons over his head.
"at’s Princess Varvara," Anna said in reply to a glance of inquiry from
Dolly as the ar-à-banc drove up.
"Ah!" said Darya Alexandrovna, and unconsciously her face betrayed her
dissatisfaction.
Princess Varvara was her husband’s aunt, and she had long known her, and
did not respect her. She knew that Princess Varvara had passed her whole life
toadying on her rich relations, but that she should now be sponging on Vronsky,
a man who was nothing to her, mortiﬁed Dolly on account of her kinship with
her husband. Anna noticed Dolly’s expression, and was disconcerted by it. She
blushed, dropped her riding habit, and stumbled over it.
Darya Alexandrovna went up to the ar-à-banc and coldly greeted Princess
Varvara. Sviazhsky too she knew. He inquired how his queer friend with the
young wife was, and running his eyes over the ill-matched horses and the carriage
with its patched mud-guards, proposed to the ladies that they should get into the
ar-à-banc.
"And I’ll get into this vehicle," he said. "e horse is quiet, and the princess
drives capitally."
"No, stay as you were," said Anna, coming up, "and we’ll go in the carriage,"
and taking Dolly’s arm, she drew her away.
Darya Alexandrovna’s eyes were fairly dazzled by the elegant carriage of

dl
a paern she had never seen before, the splendid horses, and the elegant and
gorgeous people surrounding her. But what struck her most of all was the change
that had taken place in Anna, whom she knew so well and loved. Any other
woman, a less close observer, not knowing Anna before, or not having thought
as Darya Alexandrovna had been thinking on the road, would not have noticed
anything special in Anna. But now Dolly was struck by that temporary beauty,
which is only found in women during the moments of love, and which she saw
now in Anna’s face. Everything in her face, the clearly marked dimples in her
cheeks and chin, the line of her lips, the smile which, as it were, ﬂuered about
her face, the brilliance of her eyes, the grace and rapidity of her movements, the
fulness of the notes of her voice, even the manner in which, with a sort of angry
friendliness, she answered Veslovsky when he asked permission to get on her
cob, so as to teach it to gallop with the right leg foremost—it was all peculiarly
fascinating, and it seemed as if she were herself aware of it, and rejoicing in it.
When both the women were seated in the carriage, a sudden embarrassment
came over both of them. Anna was disconcerted by the intent look of inquiry
Dolly ﬁxed upon her. Dolly was embarrassed because aer Sviazhsky’s phrase
about "this vehicle," she could not help feeling ashamed of the dirty old carriage
in which Anna was siing with her. e coachman Philip and the counting house
clerk were experiencing the same sensation. e counting house clerk, to conceal
his confusion, busied himself seling the ladies, but Philip the coachman became
sullen, and was bracing himself not to be overawed in future by this external
superiority. He smiled ironically, looking at the raven horse, and was already
deciding in his own mind that this smart troer in the ar-à-banc was only good
for promenade, and wouldn’t do thirty miles straight oﬀ in the heat.
e peasants had all got up from the cart and were inquisitively and mirthfully staring at the meeting of the friends, making their comments on it.
"ey’re pleased, too; haven’t seen each other for a long while," said the
curly-headed old man with the bast round his hair.
"I say, Uncle Gerasim, if we could take that raven horse now, to cart the
corn, that ’ud be quick work!"
"Look-ee! Is that a woman in breeches?" said one of them, pointing to
Vassenka Veslovsky siing in a side saddle.
"Nay, a man! See how smartly he’s going it!"
"Eh, lads! seems we’re not going to sleep, then?"
"What chance of sleep today!" said the old man, with a sidelong look at the
sun. "Midday’s past, look-ee! Get your hooks, and come along!"

Chapter 

dli
Anna looked at Dolly’s thin, care-worn face, with its wrinkles ﬁlled with dust
from the road, and she was on the point of saying what she was thinking, that is,
that Dolly had got thinner. But, conscious that she herself had grown handsomer,
and that Dolly’s eyes were telling her so, she sighed and began to speak about
herself.
"You are looking at me," she said, "and wondering how I can be happy in
my position? Well! it’s shameful to confess, but I … I’m inexcusably happy.
Something magical has happened to me, like a dream, when you’re frightened,
panic-stricken, and all of a sudden you wake up and all the horrors are no more.
I have waked up. I have lived through the misery, the dread, and now for a long
while past, especially since we’ve been here, I’ve been so happy!…" she said, with
a timid smile of inquiry looking at Dolly.
"How glad I am!" said Dolly smiling, involuntarily speaking more coldly
than she wanted to. "I’m very glad for you. Why haven’t you wrien to me?"
"Why?… Because I hadn’t the courage…. You forget my position…"
"To me? Hadn’t the courage? If you knew how I … I look at…"
Darya Alexandrovna wanted to express her thoughts of the morning, but
for some reason it seemed to her now out of place to do so.
"But of that we’ll talk later. What’s this, what are all these buildings?" she
asked, wanting to change the conversation and pointing to the red and green
roofs that came into view behind the green hedges of acacia and lilac. "ite a
lile town."
But Anna did not answer.
"No, no! How do you look at my position, what do you think of it?" she
asked.
"I consider…" Darya Alexandrovna was beginning, but at that instant
Vassenka Veslovsky, having brought the cob to gallop with the right leg foremost, galloped past them, bumping heavily up and down in his short jacket on
the chamois leather of the side saddle. "He’s doing it, Anna Arkadyevna!" he
shouted.
Anna did not even glance at him; but again it seemed to Darya Alexandrovna out of place to enter upon such a long conversation in the carriage, and
so she cut short her thought.
"I don’t think anything," she said, "but I always loved you, and if one loves
anyone, one loves the whole person, just as they are and not as one would like
them to be…."
Anna, taking her eyes oﬀ her friend’s face and dropping her eyelids (this
was a new habit Dolly had not seen in her before), pondered, trying to penetrate
the full signiﬁcance of the words. And obviously interpreting them as she would
have wished, she glanced at Dolly.

dlii
"If you had any sins," she said, "they would all be forgiven you for your
coming to see me and these words."
And Dolly saw that tears stood in her eyes. She pressed Anna’s hand in
silence.
"Well, what are these buildings? How many there are of them!" Aer a
moment’s silence she repeated her question.
"ese are the servants’ houses, barns, and stables," answered Anna. "And
there the park begins. It had all gone to ruin, but Alexey had everything renewed.
He is very fond of this place, and, what I never expected, he has become intensely
interested in looking aer it. But his is such a rich nature! Whatever he takes
up, he does splendidly. So far from being bored by it, he works with passionate interest. He—with his temperament as I know it—he has become careful and
businesslike, a ﬁrst-rate manager, he positively reckons every penny in his management of the land. But only in that. When it’s a question of tens of thousands,
he doesn’t think of money." She spoke with that gleefully sly smile with which
women oen talk of the secret characteristics only known to them—of those they
love. "Do you see that big building? that’s the new hospital. I believe it will cost
over a hundred thousand; that’s his hobby just now. And do you know how it
all came about? e peasants asked him for some meadowland, I think it was, at
a cheaper rate, and he refused, and I accused him of being miserly. Of course it
was not really because of that, but everything together, he began this hospital to
prove, do you see, that he was not miserly about money. C’est une petitesse, if you
like, but I love him all the more for it. And now you’ll see the house in a moment.
It was his grandfather’s house, and he has had nothing changed outside."
"How beautiful!" said Dolly, looking with involuntary admiration at the
handsome house with columns, standing out among the diﬀerent-colored greens
of the old trees in the garden.
"Isn’t it ﬁne? And from the house, from the top, the view is wonderful."
ey drove into a courtyard strewn with gravel and bright with ﬂowers,
in which two laborers were at work puing an edging of stones round the light
mould of a ﬂower bed, and drew up in a covered entry.
"Ah, they’re here already!" said Anna, looking at the saddle horses, which
were just being led away from the steps. "It is a nice horse, isn’t it? It’s my cob;
my favorite. Lead him here and bring me some sugar. Where is the count?" she
inquired of two smart footmen who darted out. "Ah, there he is!" she said, seeing
Vronsky coming to meet her with Veslovsky.
"Where are you going to put the princess?" said Vronsky in French, addressing Anna, and without waiting for a reply, he once more greeted Darya Alexandrovna, and this time he kissed her hand. "I think the big balcony room."
"Oh, no, that’s too far oﬀ! Beer in the corner room, we shall see each other

dliii
more. Come, let’s go up," said Anna, as she gave her favorite horse the sugar the
footman had brought her.
"Et vous oubliez votre devoir," she said to Veslovsky, who came out too on the
steps.
"Pardon, j’en ai tout plein les poes," he answered, smiling, puing his ﬁngers
in his waistcoat pocket.
"Mais vous venez trop tard," she said, rubbing her handkerchief on her hand,
which the horse had made wet in taking the sugar.
Anna turned to Dolly. "You can stay some time? For one day only? at’s
impossible!"
"I promised to be back, and the children…" said Dolly, feeling embarrassed
both because she had to get her bag out of the carriage, and because she knew her
face must be covered with dust.
"No, Dolly, darling!… Well, we’ll see. Come along, come along!" and Anna
led Dolly to her room.
at room was not the smart guest chamber Vronsky had suggested, but
the one of which Anna had said that Dolly would excuse it. And this room, for
which excuse was needed, was more full of luxury than any in which Dolly had
ever stayed, a luxury that reminded her of the best hotels abroad.
"Well, darling, how happy I am!" Anna said, siing down in her riding habit
for a moment beside Dolly. "Tell me about all of you. Stiva I had only a glimpse
of, and he cannot tell one about the children. How is my favorite, Tanya? ite
a big girl, I expect?"
"Yes, she’s very tall," Darya Alexandrovna answered shortly, surprised herself that she should respond so coolly about her children. "We are having a delightful stay at the Levins’," she added.
"Oh, if I had known," said Anna, "that you do not despise me!… You might
have all come to us. Stiva’s an old friend and a great friend of Alexey’s, you know,"
she added, and suddenly she blushed.
"Yes, but we are all…" Dolly answered in confusion.
"But in my delight I’m talking nonsense. e one thing, darling, is that I am
so glad to have you!" said Anna, kissing her again. "You haven’t told me yet how
and what you think about me, and I keep wanting to know. But I’m glad you will
see me as I am. e chief thing I shouldn’t like would be for people to imagine I
want to prove anything. I don’t want to prove anything; I merely want to live, to
do no one harm but myself. I have the right to do that, haven’t I? But it is a big
subject, and we’ll talk over everything properly later. Now I’ll go and dress and
send a maid to you."

dliv

Chapter 
Le alone, Darya Alexandrovna, with a good housewife’s eye, scanned her room.
All she had seen in entering the house and walking through it, and all she saw
now in her room, gave her an impression of wealth and sumptuousness and of
that modern European luxury of which she had only read in English novels, but
had never seen in Russia and in the country. Everything was new from the new
French hangings on the walls to the carpet which covered the whole ﬂoor. e
bed had a spring maress, and a special sort of bolster and silk pillowcases on the
lile pillows. e marble washstand, the dressing table, the lile sofa, the tables,
the bronze clock on the chimney piece, the window curtains, and the portières
were all new and expensive.
e smart maid, who came in to oﬀer her services, with her hair done up
high, and a gown more fashionable than Dolly’s, was as new and expensive as
the whole room. Darya Alexandrovna liked her neatness, her deferential and
obliging manners, but she felt ill at ease with her. She felt ashamed of her seeing
the patched dressing jacket that had unluckily been packed by mistake for her.
She was ashamed of the very patches and darned places of which she had been
so proud at home. At home it had been so clear that for six dressing jackets
there would be needed twenty-four yards of nainsook at sixteen pence the yard,
which was a maer of thirty shillings besides the cuing-out and making, and
these thirty shillings had been saved. But before the maid she felt, if not exactly
ashamed, at least uncomfortable.
Darya Alexandrovna had a great sense of relief when Annushka, whom she
had known for years, walked in. e smart maid was sent for to go to her mistress,
and Annushka remained with Darya Alexandrovna.
Annushka was obviously much pleased at that lady’s arrival, and began to
chaer away without a pause. Dolly observed that she was longing to express her
opinion in regard to her mistress’s position, especially as to the love and devotion
of the count to Anna Arkadyevna, but Dolly carefully interrupted her whenever
she began to speak about this.
"I grew up with Anna Arkadyevna; my lady’s dearer to me than anything.
Well, it’s not for us to judge. And, to be sure, there seems so much love…"
"Kindly pour out the water for me to wash now, please," Darya Alexandrovna cut her short.
"Certainly. We’ve two women kept specially for washing small things, but
most of the linen’s done by machinery. e count goes into everything himself.
Ah, what a husband!…"
Dolly was glad when Anna came in, and by her entrance put a stop to Annushka’s gossip.

dlv
Anna had put on a very simple batiste gown. Dolly scrutinized that simple
gown aentively. She knew what it meant, and the price at which such simplicity
was obtained.
"An old friend," said Anna of Annushka.
Anna was not embarrassed now. She was perfectly composed and at ease.
Dolly saw that she had now completely recovered from the impression her arrival
had made on her, and had assumed that superﬁcial, careless tone which, as it were,
closed the door on that compartment in which her deeper feelings and ideas were
kept.
"Well, Anna, and how is your lile girl?" asked Dolly.
"Annie?" (is was what she called her lile daughter Anna.) "Very well.
She has got on wonderfully. Would you like to see her? Come, I’ll show her to
you. We had a terrible bother," she began telling her, "over nurses. We had an
Italian wet-nurse. A good creature, but so stupid! We wanted to get rid of her,
but the baby is so used to her that we’ve gone on keeping her still."
"But how have you managed?…" Dolly was beginning a question as to what
name the lile girl would have; but noticing a sudden frown on Anna’s face, she
changed the dri of her question.
"How did you manage? have you weaned her yet?"
But Anna had understood.
"You didn’t mean to ask that? You meant to ask about her surname. Yes?
at worries Alexey. She has no name—that is, she’s a Karenina," said Anna, dropping her eyelids till nothing could be seen but the eyelashes meeting. "But we’ll
talk about all that later," her face suddenly brightening. "Come, I’ll show you her.
Elle est très gentille. She crawls now."
In the nursery the luxury which had impressed Dolly in the whole house
struck her still more. ere were lile go-carts ordered from England, and appliances for learning to walk, and a sofa aer the fashion of a billiard table, purposely
constructed for crawling, and swings and baths, all of special paern, and modern. ey were all English, solid, and of good make, and obviously very expensive.
e room was large, and very light and loy.
When they went in, the baby, with nothing on but her lile smock, was
siing in a lile elbow chair at the table, having her dinner of broth, which she
was spilling all over her lile chest. e baby was being fed, and the Russian
nursery maid was evidently sharing her meal. Neither the wet-nurse nor the head
nurse were there; they were in the next room, from which came the sound of their
conversation in the queer French which was their only means of communication.
Hearing Anna’s voice, a smart, tall, English nurse with a disagreeable face
and a dissolute expression walked in at the door, hurriedly shaking her fair curls,
and immediately began to defend herself though Anna had not found fault with

dlvi
her. At every word Anna said, the English nurse said hurriedly several times, "Yes,
my lady."
e rosy baby with her black eyebrows and hair, her sturdy red lile body
with tight goose-ﬂesh skin, delighted Darya Alexandrovna in spite of the cross
expression with which she stared at the stranger. She positively envied the baby’s
healthy appearance. She was delighted, too, at the baby’s crawling. Not one of
her own children had crawled like that. When the baby was put on the carpet and
its lile dress tucked up behind, it was wonderfully charming. Looking round like
some lile wild animal at the grown-up big people with her bright black eyes, she
smiled, unmistakably pleased at their admiring her, and holding her legs sideways,
she pressed vigorously on her arms, and rapidly drew her whole back up aer, and
then made another step forward with her lile arms.
But the whole atmosphere of the nursery, and especially the English nurse,
Darya Alexandrovna did not like at all. It was only on the supposition that no
good nurse would have entered so irregular a household as Anna’s that Darya
Alexandrovna could explain to herself how Anna with her insight into people
could take such an unprepossessing, disreputable-looking woman as nurse to her
child.
Besides, from a few words that were dropped, Darya Alexandrovna saw at
once that Anna, the two nurses, and the child had no common existence, and that
the mother’s visit was something exceptional. Anna wanted to get the baby her
plaything, and could not ﬁnd it.
Most amazing of all was the fact that on being asked how many teeth the
baby had, Anna answered wrong, and knew nothing about the two last teeth.
"I sometimes feel sorry I’m so superﬂuous here," said Anna, going out of
the nursery and holding up her skirt so as to escape the plaything standing in the
doorway. "It was very diﬀerent with my ﬁrst child."
"I expected it to be the other way," said Darya Alexandrovna shyly.
"Oh, no! By the way, do you know I saw Seryozha?" said Anna, screwing
up her eyes, as though looking at something far away. "But we’ll talk about that
later. You wouldn’t believe it, I’m like a hungry beggar woman when a full dinner
is set before her, and she does not know what to begin on ﬁrst. e dinner is you,
and the talks I have before me with you, which I could never have with anyone
else; and I don’t know which subject to begin upon ﬁrst. Mais je ne vous ferai grace
de rien. I must have everything out with you."
"Oh, I ought to give you a sketch of the company you will meet with us," she
went on. "I’ll begin with the ladies. Princess Varvara—you know her, and I know
your opinion and Stiva’s about her. Stiva says the whole aim of her existence is
to prove her superiority over Auntie Katerina Pavlovna: that’s all true; but she’s
a good-natured woman, and I am so grateful to her. In Petersburg there was a

dlvii
moment when a chaperon was absolutely essential for me. en she turned up.
But really she is good-natured. She did a great deal to alleviate my position. I see
you don’t understand all the diﬃculty of my position … there in Petersburg," she
added. "Here I’m perfectly at ease and happy. Well, of that later on, though. en
Sviazhsky—he’s the marshal of the district, and he’s a very good sort of a man,
but he wants to get something out of Alexey. You understand, with his property,
now that we are seled in the country, Alexey can exercise great inﬂuence. en
there’s Tushkevitch—you have seen him, you know—Betsy’s admirer. Now he’s
been thrown over and he’s come to see us. As Alexey says, he’s one of those
people who are very pleasant if one accepts them for what they try to appear to
be, et puis il est comme il faut, as Princess Varvara says. en Veslovsky … you
know him. A very nice boy," she said, and a sly smile curved her lips. "What’s
this wild story about him and the Levins? Veslovsky told Alexey about it, and we
don’t believe it. Il est très gentil et naïf," she said again with the same smile. "Men
need occupation, and Alexey needs a circle, so I value all these people. We have
to have the house lively and gay, so that Alexey may not long for any novelty.
en you’ll see the steward—a German, a very good fellow, and he understands
his work. Alexey has a very high opinion of him. en the doctor, a young man,
not quite a Nihilist perhaps, but you know, eats with his knife … but a very good
doctor. en the architect…. Une petite cour!"

Chapter 
"Here’s Dolly for you, princess, you were so anxious to see her," said Anna, coming
out with Darya Alexandrovna onto the stone terrace where Princess Varvara was
siing in the shade at an embroidery frame, working at a cover for Count Alexey
Kirillovitch’s easy chair. "She says she doesn’t want anything before dinner, but
please order some lunch for her, and I’ll go and look for Alexey and bring them
all in."
Princess Varvara gave Dolly a cordial and rather patronizing reception,
and began at once explaining to her that she was living with Anna because she
had always cared more for her than her sister Katerina Pavlovna, the aunt that
had brought Anna up, and that now, when every one had abandoned Anna, she
thought it her duty to help her in this most diﬃcult period of transition.
"Her husband will give her a divorce, and then I shall go back to my solitude;
but now I can be of use, and I am doing my duty, however diﬃcult it may be for
me—not like some other people. And how sweet it is of you, how right of you to
have come! ey live like the best of married couples; it’s for God to judge them,
not for us. And didn’t Biryuzovsky and Madame Avenieva … and Sam Nikandrov,

dlviii
and Vassiliev and Madame Mamonova, and Liza Neptunova… Did no one say
anything about them? And it has ended by their being received by everyone.
And then, c’est un intérieur si joli, si comme il faut. Tout-à-fait à l’anglaise. On se
réunit le matin au breakfast, et puis on se sépare. Everyone does as he pleases till
dinnertime. Dinner at seven o’clock. Stiva did very rightly to send you. He needs
their support. You know that through his mother and brother he can do anything.
And then they do so much good. He didn’t tell you about his hospital? Ce sera
admirable—everything from Paris."
eir conversation was interrupted by Anna, who had found the men of the
party in the billiard room, and returned with them to the terrace. ere was still a
long time before the dinner-hour, it was exquisite weather, and so several diﬀerent
methods of spending the next two hours were proposed. ere were very many
methods of passing the time at Vozdvizhenskoe, and these were all unlike those
in use at Pokrovskoe.
"Une partie de lawn-tennis," Veslovsky proposed, with his handsome smile.
"We’ll be partners again, Anna Arkadyevna."
"No, it’s too hot; beer stroll about the garden and have a row in the boat,
show Darya Alexandrovna the river banks." Vronsky proposed.
"I agree to anything," said Sviazhsky.
"I imagine that what Dolly would like best would be a stroll—wouldn’t you?
And then the boat, perhaps," said Anna.
So it was decided. Veslovsky and Tushkevitch went oﬀ to the bathing place,
promising to get the boat ready and to wait there for them.
ey walked along the path in two couples, Anna with Sviazhsky, and Dolly
with Vronsky. Dolly was a lile embarrassed and anxious in the new surroundings
in which she found herself. Abstractly, theoretically, she did not merely justify,
she positively approved of Anna’s conduct. As is indeed not unfrequent with
women of unimpeachable virtue, weary of the monotony of respectable existence,
at a distance she not only excused illicit love, she positively envied it. Besides,
she loved Anna with all her heart. But seeing Anna in actual life among these
strangers, with this fashionable tone that was so new to Darya Alexandrovna,
she felt ill at ease. What she disliked particularly was seeing Princess Varvara
ready to overlook everything for the sake of the comforts she enjoyed.
As a general principle, abstractly, Dolly approved of Anna’s action; but to
see the man for whose sake her action had been taken was disagreeable to her.
Moreover, she had never liked Vronsky. She thought him very proud, and saw
nothing in him of which he could be proud except his wealth. But against her
own will, here in his own house, he overawed her more than ever, and she could
not be at ease with him. She felt with him the same feeling she had had with
the maid about her dressing jacket. Just as with the maid she had felt not exactly

dlix
ashamed, but embarrassed at her darns, so she felt with him not exactly ashamed,
but embarrassed at herself.
Dolly was ill at ease, and tried to ﬁnd a subject of conversation. Even though
she supposed that, through his pride, praise of his house and garden would be sure
to be disagreeable to him, she did all the same tell him how much she liked his
house.
"Yes, it’s a very ﬁne building, and in the good old-fashioned style," he said.
"I like so much the court in front of the steps. Was that always so?"
"Oh, no!" he said, and his face beamed with pleasure. "If you could only
have seen that court last spring!"
And he began, at ﬁrst rather diﬃdently, but more and more carried away
by the subject as he went on, to draw her aention to the various details of the
decoration of his house and garden. It was evident that, having devoted a great
deal of trouble to improve and beautify his home, Vronsky felt a need to show
oﬀ the improvements to a new person, and was genuinely delighted at Darya
Alexandrovna’s praise.
"If you would care to look at the hospital, and are not tired, indeed, it’s not
far. Shall we go?" he said, glancing into her face to convince himself that she was
not bored. "Are you coming, Anna?" he turned to her.
"We will come, won’t we?" she said, addressing Sviazhsky. "Mais il ne faut
pas laisser le pauvre Veslovsky et Tushkevit se morfondre là dans le bateau. We
must send and tell them."
"Yes, this is a monument he is seing up here," said Anna, turning to Dolly
with that sly smile of comprehension with which she had previously talked about
the hospital.
"Oh, it’s a work of real importance!" said Sviazhsky. But to show he was
not trying to ingratiate himself with Vronsky, he promptly added some slightly
critical remarks.
"I wonder, though, count," he said, "that while you do so much for the health
of the peasants, you take so lile interest in the schools."
"C’est devenu tellement commun les écoles," said Vronsky. "You understand
it’s not on that account, but it just happens so, my interest has been diverted elsewhere. is way then to the hospital," he said to Darya Alexandrovna, pointing
to a turning out of the avenue.
e ladies put up their parasols and turned into the side path. Aer going
down several turnings, and going through a lile gate, Darya Alexandrovna saw
standing on rising ground before her a large pretentious-looking red building,
almost ﬁnished. e iron roof, which was not yet painted, shone with dazzling
brightness in the sunshine. Beside the ﬁnished building another had been begun, surrounded by scaﬀolding. Workmen in aprons, standing on scaﬀolds, were

dlx
laying bricks, pouring mortar out of vats, and smoothing it with trowels.
"How quickly work gets done with you!" said Sviazhsky. "When I was here
last time the roof was not on."
"By the autumn it will all be ready. Inside almost everything is done," said
Anna.
"And what’s this new building?"
"at’s the house for the doctor and the dispensary," answered Vronsky,
seeing the architect in a short jacket coming towards him; and excusing himself
to the ladies, he went to meet him.
Going round a hole where the workmen were slaking lime, he stood still
with the architect and began talking rather warmly.
"e front is still too low," he said to Anna, who had asked what was the
maer.
"I said the foundation ought to be raised," said Anna.
"Yes, of course it would have been much beer, Anna Arkadyevna," said the
architect, "but now it’s too late."
"Yes, I take a great interest in it," Anna answered Sviazhsky, who was expressing his surprise at her knowledge of architecture. "is new building ought
to have been in harmony with the hospital. It was an aerthought, and was begun
without a plan."
Vronsky, having ﬁnished his talk with the architect, joined the ladies, and
led them inside the hospital.
Although they were still at work on the cornices outside and were painting
on the ground ﬂoor, upstairs almost all the rooms were ﬁnished. Going up the
broad cast-iron staircase to the landing, they walked into the ﬁrst large room.
e walls were stuccoed to look like marble, the huge plate-glass windows were
already in, only the parquet ﬂoor was not yet ﬁnished, and the carpenters, who
were planing a block of it, le their work, taking oﬀ the bands that fastened their
hair, to greet the gentry.
"is is the reception room," said Vronsky. "Here there will be a desk, tables,
and benches, and nothing more."
"is way; let us go in here. Don’t go near the window," said Anna, trying
the paint to see if it were dry. "Alexey, the paint’s dry already," she added.
From the reception room they went into the corridor. Here Vronsky showed
them the mechanism for ventilation on a novel system. en he showed them
marble baths, and beds with extraordinary springs. en he showed them the
wards one aer another, the storeroom, the linen room, then the heating stove
of a new paern, then the trolleys, which would make no noise as they carried
everything needed along the corridors, and many other things. Sviazhsky, as a
connoisseur in the latest mechanical improvements, appreciated everything fully.

dlxi
Dolly simply wondered at all she had not seen before, and, anxious to understand
it all, made minute inquiries about everything, which gave Vronsky great satisfaction.
"Yes, I imagine that this will be the solitary example of a properly ﬁed
hospital in Russia," said Sviazhsky.
"And won’t you have a lying-in ward?" asked Dolly. "at’s so much needed
in the country. I have oen…"
In spite of his usual courtesy, Vronsky interrupted her.
"is is not a lying-in home, but a hospital for the sick, and is intended
for all diseases, except infectious complaints," he said. "Ah! look at this," and he
rolled up to Darya Alexandrovna an invalid chair that had just been ordered for
the convalescents. "Look." He sat down in the chair and began moving it. "e
patient can’t walk—still too weak, perhaps, or something wrong with his legs, but
he must have air, and he moves, rolls himself along…."
Darya Alexandrovna was interested by everything. She liked everything
very much, but most of all she liked Vronsky himself with his natural, simplehearted eagerness. "Yes, he’s a very nice, good man," she thought several times,
not hearing what he said, but looking at him and penetrating into his expression,
while she mentally put herself in Anna’s place. She liked him so much just now
with his eager interest that she saw how Anna could be in love with him.

Chapter 
"No, I think the princess is tired, and horses don’t interest her," Vronsky said to
Anna, who wanted to go on to the stables, where Sviazhsky wished to see the new
stallion. "You go on, while I escort the princess home, and we’ll have a lile talk,"
he said, "if you would like that?" he added, turning to her.
"I know nothing about horses, and I shall be delighted," answered Darya
Alexandrovna, rather astonished.
She saw by Vronsky’s face that he wanted something from her. She was not
mistaken. As soon as they had passed through the lile gate back into the garden,
he looked in the direction Anna had taken, and having made sure that she could
neither hear nor see them, he began:
"You guess that I have something I want to say to you," he said, looking at
her with laughing eyes. "I am not wrong in believing you to be a friend of Anna’s."
He took oﬀ his hat, and taking out his handkerchief, wiped his head, which was
growing bald.
Darya Alexandrovna made no answer, and merely stared at him with dismay. When she was le alone with him, she suddenly felt afraid; his laughing

dlxii
eyes and stern expression scared her.
e most diverse suppositions as to what he was about to speak of to her
ﬂashed into her brain. "He is going to beg me to come to stay with them with
the children, and I shall have to refuse; or to create a set that will receive Anna
in Moscow…. Or isn’t it Vassenka Veslovsky and his relations with Anna? Or
perhaps about Kiy, that he feels he was to blame?" All her conjectures were
unpleasant, but she did not guess what he really wanted to talk about to her.
"You have so much inﬂuence with Anna, she is so fond of you," he said; "do
help me."
Darya Alexandrovna looked with timid inquiry into his energetic face,
which under the lime-trees was continually being lighted up in patches by the
sunshine, and then passing into complete shadow again. She waited for him to
say more, but he walked in silence beside her, scratching with his cane in the
gravel.
"You have come to see us, you, the only woman of Anna’s former friends—I
don’t count Princess Varvara—but I know that you have done this not because
you regard our position as normal, but because, understanding all the diﬃculty
of the position, you still love her and want to be a help to her. Have I understood
you rightly?" he asked, looking round at her.
"Oh, yes," answered Darya Alexandrovna, puing down her sunshade,
"but…"
"No," he broke in, and unconsciously, oblivious of the awkward position into
which he was puing his companion, he stopped abruptly, so that she had to stop
short too. "No one feels more deeply and intensely than I do all the diﬃculty of
Anna’s position; and that you may well understand, if you do me the honor of
supposing I have any heart. I am to blame for that position, and that is why I feel
it."
"I understand," said Darya Alexandrovna, involuntarily admiring the sincerity and ﬁrmness with which he said this. "But just because you feel yourself
responsible, you exaggerate it, I am afraid," she said. "Her position in the world is
diﬃcult, I can well understand."
"In the world it is hell!" he brought out quickly, frowning darkly. "You can’t
imagine moral suﬀerings greater than what she went through in Petersburg in
that fortnight … and I beg you to believe it."
"Yes, but here, so long as neither Anna … nor you miss society…"
"Society!" he said contemptuously, "how could I miss society?"
"So far—and it may be so always—you are happy and at peace. I see in Anna
that she is happy, perfectly happy, she has had time to tell me so much already,"
said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling; and involuntarily, as she said this, at the same
moment a doubt entered her mind whether Anna really were happy.

dlxiii
But Vronsky, it appeared, had no doubts on that score.
"Yes, yes," he said, "I know that she has revived aer all her suﬀerings; she
is happy. She is happy in the present. But I?… I am afraid of what is before us …
I beg your pardon, you would like to walk on?"
"No, I don’t mind."
"Well, then, let us sit here."
Darya Alexandrovna sat down on a garden seat in a corner of the avenue.
He stood up facing her.
"I see that she is happy," he repeated, and the doubt whether she were happy
sank more deeply into Darya Alexandrovna’s mind. "But can it last? Whether we
have acted rightly or wrongly is another question, but the die is cast," he said,
passing from Russian to French, "and we are bound together for life. We are
united by all the ties of love that we hold most sacred. We have a child, we may
have other children. But the law and all the conditions of our position are such
that thousands of complications arise which she does not see and does not want to
see. And that one can well understand. But I can’t help seeing them. My daughter
is by law not my daughter, but Karenin’s. I cannot bear this falsity!" he said, with
a vigorous gesture of refusal, and he looked with gloomy inquiry towards Darya
Alexandrovna.
She made no answer, but simply gazed at him. He went on:
"One day a son may be born, my son, and he will be legally a Karenin; he
will not be the heir of my name nor of my property, and however happy we may
be in our home life and however many children we may have, there will be no
real tie between us. ey will be Karenins. You can understand the bierness
and horror of this position! I have tried to speak of this to Anna. It irritates her.
She does not understand, and to her I cannot speak plainly of all this. Now look
at another side. I am happy, happy in her love, but I must have occupation. I
have found occupation, and am proud of what I am doing and consider it nobler
than the pursuits of my former companions at court and in the army. And most
certainly I would not change the work I am doing for theirs. I am working here,
seled in my own place, and I am happy and contented, and we need nothing
more to make us happy. I love my work here. Ce n’est pas un pis-aller, on the
contrary…"
Darya Alexandrovna noticed that at this point in his explanation he grew
confused, and she did not quite understand this digression, but she felt that having
once begun to speak of maers near his heart, of which he could not speak to
Anna, he was now making a clean breast of everything, and that the question of
his pursuits in the country fell into the same category of maers near his heart,
as the question of his relations with Anna.
"Well, I will go on," he said, collecting himself. "e great thing is that as I

dlxiv
work I want to have a conviction that what I am doing will not die with me, that
I shall have heirs to come aer me,—and this I have not. Conceive the position
of a man who knows that his children, the children of the woman he loves, will
not be his, but will belong to someone who hates them and cares nothing about
them! It is awful!"
He paused, evidently much moved.
"Yes, indeed, I see that. But what can Anna do?" queried Darya Alexandrovna.
"Yes, that brings me to the object of my conversation," he said, calming himself with an eﬀort. "Anna can, it depends on her…. Even to petition the Tsar for
legitimization, a divorce is essential. And that depends on Anna. Her husband
agreed to a divorce—at that time your husband had arranged it completely. And
now, I know, he would not refuse it. It is only a maer of writing to him. He
said plainly at that time that if she expressed the desire, he would not refuse. Of
course," he said gloomily, "it is one of those Pharisaical cruelties of which only
such heartless men are capable. He knows what agony any recollection of him
must give her, and knowing her, he must have a leer from her. I can understand
that it is agony to her. But the maer is of such importance, that one must passer
pardessus toutes ces ﬁnesses de sentiment. Il y va du bonheur et de l’existence d’Anne
et de ses enfants. I won’t speak of myself, though it’s hard for me, very hard,"
he said, with an expression as though he were threatening someone for its being
hard for him. "And so it is, princess, that I am shamelessly clutching at you as
an anchor of salvation. Help me to persuade her to write to him and ask for a
divorce."
"Yes, of course," Darya Alexandrovna said dreamily, as she vividly recalled
her last interview with Alexey Alexandrovitch. "Yes, of course," she repeated with
decision, thinking of Anna.
"Use your inﬂuence with her, make her write. I don’t like—I’m almost unable
to speak about this to her."
"Very well, I will talk to her. But how is it she does not think of it hersel?"
said Darya Alexandrovna, and for some reason she suddenly at that point recalled
Anna’s strange new habit of half-closing her eyes. And she remembered that
Anna drooped her eyelids just when the deeper questions of life were touched
upon. "Just as though she half-shut her eyes to her own life, so as not to see
everything," thought Dolly. "Yes, indeed, for my own sake and for hers I will talk
to her," Dolly said in reply to his look of gratitude.
ey got up and walked to the house.

Chapter 

dlxv
When Anna found Dolly at home before her, she looked intently in her eyes, as
though questioning her about the talk she had had with Vronsky, but she made
no inquiry in words.
"I believe it’s dinner time," she said. "We’ve not seen each other at all yet. I
am reckoning on the evening. Now I want to go and dress. I expect you do too;
we all got splashed at the buildings."
Dolly went to her room and she felt amused. To change her dress was impossible, for she had already put on her best dress. But in order to signify in some
way her preparation for dinner, she asked the maid to brush her dress, changed
her cuﬀs and tie, and put some lace on her head.
"is is all I can do," she said with a smile to Anna, who came in to her in a
third dress, again of extreme simplicity.
"Yes, we are too formal here," she said, as it were apologizing for her magniﬁcence. "Alexey is delighted at your visit, as he rarely is at anything. He has
completely lost his heart to you," she added. "You’re not tired?"
ere was no time for talking about anything before dinner. Going into the
drawing room they found Princess Varvara already there, and the gentlemen of
the party in black frock-coats. e architect wore a swallow-tail coat. Vronsky
presented the doctor and the steward to his guest. e architect he had already
introduced to her at the hospital.
A stout butler, resplendent with a smoothly shaven round chin and a
starched white cravat, announced that dinner was ready, and the ladies got up.
Vronsky asked Sviazhsky to take in Anna Arkadyevna, and himself oﬀered his
arm to Dolly. Veslovsky was before Tushkevitch in oﬀering his arm to Princess
Varvara, so that Tushkevitch with the steward and the doctor walked in alone.
e dinner, the dining room, the service, the waiting at table, the wine, and
the food, were not simply in keeping with the general tone of modern luxury
throughout all the house, but seemed even more sumptuous and modern. Darya
Alexandrovna watched this luxury which was novel to her, and as a good housekeeper used to managing a household—although she never dreamed of adapting
anything she saw to her own household, as it was all in a style of luxury far above
her own manner of living—she could not help scrutinizing every detail, and wondering how and by whom it was all done. Vassenka Veslovsky, her husband, and
even Sviazhsky, and many other people she knew, would never have considered
this question, and would have readily believed what every well-bred host tries to
make his guests feel, that is, that all that is well-ordered in his house has cost him,
the host, no trouble whatever, but comes of itself. Darya Alexandrovna was well
aware that even porridge for the children’s breakfast does not come of itself, and
that therefore, where so complicated and magniﬁcent a style of luxury was maintained, someone must give earnest aention to its organization. And from the

dlxvi
glance with which Alexey Kirillovitch scanned the table, from the way he nodded to the butler, and oﬀered Darya Alexandrovna her choice between cold soup
and hot soup, she saw that it was all organized and maintained by the care of the
master of the house himself. It was evident that it all rested no more upon Anna
than upon Veslovsky. She, Sviazhsky, the princess, and Veslovsky, were equally
guests, with light hearts enjoying what had been arranged for them.
Anna was the hostess only in conducting the conversation. e conversation was a diﬃcult one for the lady of the house at a small table with persons
present, like the steward and the architect, belonging to a completely diﬀerent
world, struggling not to be overawed by an elegance to which they were unaccustomed, and unable to sustain a large share in the general conversation. But
this diﬃcult conversation Anna directed with her usual tact and naturalness, and
indeed she did so with actual enjoyment, as Darya Alexandrovna observed. e
conversation began about the row Tushkevitch and Veslovsky had taken alone
together in the boat, and Tushkevitch began describing the last boat races in Petersburg at the Yacht Club. But Anna, seizing the ﬁrst pause, at once turned to
the architect to draw him out of his silence.
"Nikolay Ivanitch was struck," she said, meaning Sviazhsky, "at the progress
the new building had made since he was here last; but I am there every day, and
every day I wonder at the rate at which it grows."
"It’s ﬁrst-rate working with his excellency," said the architect with a smile
(he was respectful and composed, though with a sense of his own dignity). "It’s a
very diﬀerent maer to have to do with the district authorities. Where one would
have to write out sheaves of papers, here I call upon the count, and in three words
we sele the business."
"e American way of doing business," said Sviazhsky, with a smile.
"Yes, there they build in a rational fashion…"
e conversation passed to the misuse of political power in the United
States, but Anna quickly brought it round to another topic, so as to draw the
steward into talk.
"Have you ever seen a reaping machine?" she said, addressing Darya
Alexandrovna. "We had just ridden over to look at one when we met. It’s the
ﬁrst time I ever saw one."
"How do they work?" asked Dolly.
"Exactly like lile scissors. A plank and a lot of lile scissors. Like this."
Anna took a knife and fork in her beautiful white hands covered with rings,
and began showing how the machine worked. It was clear that she saw nothing
would be understood from her explanation; but aware that her talk was pleasant
and her hands beautiful she went on explaining.
"More like lile penknives," Veslovsky said playfully, never taking his eyes

dlxvii
oﬀ her.
Anna gave a just perceptible smile, but made no answer. "Isn’t it true, Karl
Fedoritch, that it’s just like lile scissors?" she said to the steward.
"Oh, ja," answered the German. "Es ist ein ganz einfaes Ding," and he began
to explain the construction of the machine.
"It’s a pity it doesn’t bind too. I saw one at the Vienna exhibition, which
binds with a wire," said Sviazhsky. "ey would be more proﬁtable in use."
"Es kommt drauf an…. Der Preis vom Draht muss ausgerenet werden." And
the German, roused from his taciturnity, turned to Vronsky. "Das lässt si ausrenen, Erlaut." e German was just feeling in the pocket where were his pencil and the notebook he always wrote in, but recollecting that he was at a dinner,
and observing Vronsky’s chilly glance, he checked himself. "Zu compliziert, mat
zu viel Klopot," he concluded.
"Wünst man Doots, so hat man au Klopots," said Vassenka Veslovsky,
mimicking the German. "J’adore l’allemand," he addressed Anna again with the
same smile.
"Cessez," she said with playful severity.
"We expected to ﬁnd you in the ﬁelds, Vassily Semyonitch," she said to the
doctor, a sickly-looking man; "have you been there?"
"I went there, but I had taken ﬂight," the doctor answered with gloomy jocoseness.
"en you’ve taken a good constitutional?"
"Splendid!"
"Well, and how was the old woman? I hope it’s not typhus?"
"Typhus it is not, but it’s taking a bad turn."
"What a pity!" said Anna, and having thus paid the dues of civility to her
domestic circle, she turned to her own friends.
"It would be a hard task, though, to construct a machine from your description, Anna Arkadyevna," Sviazhsky said jestingly.
"Oh, no, why so?" said Anna with a smile that betrayed that she knew there
was something charming in her disquisitions upon the machine that had been
noticed by Sviazhsky. is new trait of girlish coqueishness made an unpleasant
impression on Dolly.
"But Anna Arkadyevna’s knowledge of architecture is marvelous," said
Tushkevitch.
"To be sure, I heard Anna Arkadyevna talking yesterday about plinths and
damp-courses," said Veslovsky. "Have I got it right?"
"ere’s nothing marvelous about it, when one sees and hears so much of
it," said Anna. "But, I dare say, you don’t even know what houses are made o?"
Darya Alexandrovna saw that Anna disliked the tone of raillery that existed

dlxviii
between her and Veslovsky, but fell in with it against her will.
Vronsky acted in this maer quite diﬀerently from Levin. He obviously
aached no signiﬁcance to Veslovsky’s chaering; on the contrary, he encouraged
his jests.
"Come now, tell us, Veslovsky, how are the stones held together?"
"By cement, of course."
"Bravo! And what is cement?"
"Oh, some sort of paste … no, puy," said Veslovsky, raising a general laugh.
e company at dinner, with the exception of the doctor, the architect, and
the steward, who remained plunged in gloomy silence, kept up a conversation
that never paused, glancing oﬀ one subject, fastening on another, and at times
stinging one or the other to the quick. Once Darya Alexandrovna felt wounded
to the quick, and got so hot that she positively ﬂushed and wondered aerwards
whether she had said anything extreme or unpleasant. Sviazhsky began talking
of Levin, describing his strange view that machinery is simply pernicious in its
eﬀects on Russian agriculture.
"I have not the pleasure of knowing this M. Levin," Vronsky said, smiling,
"but most likely he has never seen the machines he condemns; or if he has seen
and tried any, it must have been aer a queer fashion, some Russian imitation, not
a machine from abroad. What sort of views can anyone have on such a subject?"
"Turkish views, in general," Veslovsky said, turning to Anna with a smile.
"I can’t defend his opinions," Darya Alexandrovna said, ﬁring up; "but I can
say that he’s a highly cultivated man, and if he were here he would know very
well how to answer you, though I am not capable of doing so."
"I like him extremely, and we are great friends," Sviazhsky said, smiling
good-naturedly. "Mais pardon, il est un petit peu toqué; he maintains, for instance,
that district councils and arbitration boards are all of no use, and he is unwilling
to take part in anything."
"It’s our Russian apathy," said Vronsky, pouring water from an iced decanter
into a delicate glass on a high stem; "we’ve no sense of the duties our privileges
impose upon us, and so we refuse to recognize these duties."
"I know no man more strict in the performance of his duties," said Darya
Alexandrovna, irritated by Vronsky’s tone of superiority.
"For my part," pursued Vronsky, who was evidently for some reason or other
keenly aﬀected by this conversation, "such as I am, I am, on the contrary, extremely grateful for the honor they have done me, thanks to Nikolay Ivanitch"
(he indicated Sviazhsky), "in electing me a justice of the peace. I consider that
for me the duty of being present at the session, of judging some peasants’ quarrel about a horse, is as important as anything I can do. And I shall regard it as
an honor if they elect me for the district council. It’s only in that way I can pay

dlxix
for the advantages I enjoy as a landowner. Unluckily they don’t understand the
weight that the big landowners ought to have in the state."
It was strange to Darya Alexandrovna to hear how serenely conﬁdent he
was of being right at his own table. She thought how Levin, who believed the
opposite, was just as positive in his opinions at his own table. But she loved
Levin, and so she was on his side.
"So we can reckon upon you, count, for the coming elections?" said Sviazhsky. "But you must come a lile beforehand, so as to be on the spot by the eighth.
If you would do me the honor to stop with me."
"I rather agree with your beau-frère," said Anna, "though not quite on the
same ground as he," she added with a smile. "I’m afraid that we have too many of
these public duties in these laer days. Just as in old days there were so many government functionaries that one had to call in a functionary for every single thing,
so now everyone’s doing some sort of public duty. Alexey has been here now six
months, and he’s a member, I do believe, of ﬁve or six diﬀerent public bodies. Du
train que cela va, the whole time will be wasted on it. And I’m afraid that with
such a multiplicity of these bodies, they’ll end in being a mere form. How many
are you a member of, Nikolay Ivanitch?" she turned to Sviazhsky—"over twenty,
I fancy."
Anna spoke lightly, but irritation could be discerned in her tone. Darya
Alexandrovna, watching Anna and Vronsky aentively, detected it instantly. She
noticed, too, that as she spoke Vronsky’s face had immediately taken a serious and
obstinate expression. Noticing this, and that Princess Varvara at once made haste
to change the conversation by talking of Petersburg acquaintances, and remembering what Vronsky had without apparent connection said in the garden of his
work in the country, Dolly surmised that this question of public activity was connected with some deep private disagreement between Anna and Vronsky.
e dinner, the wine, the decoration of the table were all very good; but it
was all like what Darya Alexandrovna had seen at formal dinners and balls which
of late years had become quite unfamiliar to her; it all had the same impersonal
and constrained character, and so on an ordinary day and in a lile circle of friends
it made a disagreeable impression on her.
Aer dinner they sat on the terrace, then they proceeded to play lawn tennis. e players, divided into two parties, stood on opposite sides of a tightly
drawn net with gilt poles on the carefully leveled and rolled croquet-ground.
Darya Alexandrovna made an aempt to play, but it was a long time before she
could understand the game, and by the time she did understand it, she was so tired
that she sat down with Princess Varvara and simply looked on at the players. Her
partner, Tushkevitch, gave up playing too, but the others kept the game up for
a long time. Sviazhsky and Vronsky both played very well and seriously. ey

dlxx
kept a sharp lookout on the balls served to them, and without haste or geing
in each other’s way, they ran adroitly up to them, waited for the rebound, and
neatly and accurately returned them over the net. Veslovsky played worse than
the others. He was too eager, but he kept the players lively with his high spirits.
His laughter and outcries never paused. Like the other men of the party, with the
ladies’ permission, he took oﬀ his coat, and his solid, comely ﬁgure in his white
shirt-sleeves, with his red perspiring face and his impulsive movements, made a
picture that imprinted itself vividly on the memory.
When Darya Alexandrovna lay in bed that night, as soon as she closed her
eyes, she saw Vassenka Veslovsky ﬂying about the croquet ground.
During the game Darya Alexandrovna was not enjoying herself. She did
not like the light tone of raillery that was kept up all the time between Vassenka
Veslovsky and Anna, and the unnaturalness altogether of grown-up people, all
alone without children, playing at a child’s game. But to avoid breaking up the
party and to get through the time somehow, aer a rest she joined the game again,
and pretended to be enjoying it. All that day it seemed to her as though she were
acting in a theater with actors cleverer than she, and that her bad acting was
spoiling the whole performance. She had come with the intention of staying two
days, if all went well. But in the evening, during the game, she made up her mind
that she would go home next day. e maternal cares and worries, which she
had so hated on the way, now, aer a day spent without them, struck her in quite
another light, and tempted her back to them.
When, aer evening tea and a row by night in the boat, Darya Alexandrovna
went alone to her room, took oﬀ her dress, and began arranging her thin hair for
the night, she had a great sense of relief.
It was positively disagreeable to her to think that Anna was coming to see
her immediately. She longed to be alone with her own thoughts.

Chapter 
Dolly was wanting to go to bed when Anna came in to see her, aired for the
night. In the course of the day Anna had several times begun to speak of maers
near her heart, and every time aer a few words she had stopped: "Aerwards,
by ourselves, we’ll talk about everything. I’ve got so much I want to tell you," she
said.
Now they were by themselves, and Anna did not know what to talk about.
She sat in the window looking at Dolly, and going over in her own mind all the
stores of intimate talk which had seemed so inexhaustible beforehand, and she
found nothing. At that moment it seemed to her that everything had been said

dlxxi
already.
"Well, what of Kiy?" she said with a heavy sigh, looking penitently at
Dolly. "Tell me the truth, Dolly: isn’t she angry with me?"
"Angry? Oh, no!" said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling.
"But she hates me, despises me?"
"Oh, no! But you know that sort of thing isn’t forgiven."
"Yes, yes," said Anna, turning away and looking out of the open window.
"But I was not to blame. And who is to blame? What’s the meaning of being to
blame? Could it have been otherwise? What do you think? Could it possibly
have happened that you didn’t become the wife of Stiva?"
"Really, I don’t know. But this is what I want you to tell me…"
"Yes, yes, but we’ve not ﬁnished about Kiy. Is she happy? He’s a very nice
man, they say."
"He’s much more than very nice. I don’t know a beer man."
"Ah, how glad I am! I’m so glad! Much more than very nice," she repeated.
Dolly smiled.
"But tell me about yourself. We’ve a great deal to talk about. And I’ve had a
talk with…" Dolly did not know what to call him. She felt it awkward to call him
either the count or Alexey Kirillovitch.
"With Alexey," said Anna, "I know what you talked about. But I wanted to
ask you directly what you think of me, of my life?"
"How am I to say like that straight o? I really don’t know."
"No, tell me all the same…. You see my life. But you mustn’t forget that
you’re seeing us in the summer, when you have come to us and we are not alone….
But we came here early in the spring, lived quite alone, and shall be alone again,
and I desire nothing beer. But imagine me living alone without him, alone, and
that will be … I see by everything that it will oen be repeated, that he will be half
the time away from home," she said, geing up and siing down close by Dolly.
"Of course," she interrupted Dolly, who would have answered, "of course
I won’t try to keep him by force. I don’t keep him indeed. e races are just
coming, his horses are running, he will go. I’m very glad. But think of me, fancy
my position…. But what’s the use of talking about it?" She smiled. "Well, what
did he talk about with you?"
"He spoke of what I want to speak about of myself, and it’s easy for me to
be his advocate; of whether there is not a possibility … whether you could not…"
(Darya Alexandrovna hesitated) "correct, improve your position…. You know how
I look at it…. But all the same, if possible, you should get married…."
"Divorce, you mean?" said Anna. "Do you know, the only woman who came
to see me in Petersburg was Betsy Tverskaya? You know her, of course? Au fond,
c’est la femme la plus depraveé qui existe. She had an intrigue with Tushkevitch,

dlxxii
deceiving her husband in the basest way. And she told me that she did not care to
know me so long as my position was irregular. Don’t imagine I would compare
… I know you, darling. But I could not help remembering…. Well, so what did he
say to you?" she repeated.
"He said that he was unhappy on your account and his own. Perhaps you
will say that it’s egoism, but what a legitimate and noble egoism. He wants ﬁrst
of all to legitimize his daughter, and to be your husband, to have a legal right to
you."
"What wife, what slave can be so uerly a slave as I, in my position?" she
put in gloomily.
"e chief thing he desires … he desires that you should not suﬀer."
"at’s impossible. Well?"
"Well, and the most legitimate desire—he wishes that your children should
have a name."
"What children?" Anna said, not looking at Dolly, and half closing her eyes.
"Annie and those to come…"
"He need not trouble on that score; I shall have no more children."
"How can you tell that you won’t?"
"I shall not, because I don’t wish it." And, in spite of all her emotion, Anna
smiled, as she caught the naïve expression of curiosity, wonder, and horror on
Dolly’s face.
"e doctor told me aer my illness…"
"Impossible!" said Dolly, opening her eyes wide.
For her this was one of those discoveries the consequences and deductions
from which are so immense that all that one feels for the ﬁrst instant is that it
is impossible to take it all in, and that one will have to reﬂect a great, great deal
upon it.
is discovery, suddenly throwing light on all those families of one or two
children, which had hitherto been so incomprehensible to her, aroused so many
ideas, reﬂections, and contradictory emotions, that she had nothing to say, and
simply gazed with wide-open eyes of wonder at Anna. is was the very thing
she had been dreaming of, but now learning that it was possible, she was horriﬁed.
She felt that it was too simple a solution of too complicated a problem.
"N’est-ce pas immoral?" was all she said, aer a brief pause.
"Why so? ink, I have a choice between two alternatives: either to be
with child, that is an invalid, or to be the friend and companion of my husband—practically my husband," Anna said in a tone intentionally superﬁcial and
frivolous.
"Yes, yes," said Darya Alexandrovna, hearing the very arguments she had
used to herself, and not ﬁnding the same force in them as before.

dlxxiii
"For you, for other people," said Anna, as though divining her thoughts,
"there may be reason to hesitate; but for me…. You must consider, I am not his
wife; he loves me as long as he loves me. And how am I to keep his love? Not like
this!"
She moved her white hands in a curve before her waist with extraordinary
rapidity, as happens during moments of excitement; ideas and memories rushed
into Darya Alexandrovna’s head. "I," she thought, "did not keep my araction for
Stiva; he le me for others, and the ﬁrst woman for whom he betrayed me did not
keep him by being always prey and lively. He deserted her and took another.
And can Anna aract and keep Count Vronsky in that way? If that is what he
looks for, he will ﬁnd dresses and manners still more aractive and charming.
And however white and beautiful her bare arms are, however beautiful her full
ﬁgure and her eager face under her black curls, he will ﬁnd something beer still,
just as my disgusting, pitiful, and charming husband does."
Dolly made no answer, she merely sighed. Anna noticed this sigh, indicating dissent, and she went on. In her armory she had other arguments so strong
that no answer could be made to them.
"Do you say that it’s not right? But you must consider," she went on; "you
forget my position. How can I desire children? I’m not speaking of the suﬀering,
I’m not afraid of that. ink only, what are my children to be? Ill-fated children,
who will have to bear a stranger’s name. For the very fact of their birth they will
be forced to be ashamed of their mother, their father, their birth."
"But that is just why a divorce is necessary." But Anna did not hear her. She
longed to give uerance to all the arguments with which she had so many times
convinced herself.
"What is reason given me for, if I am not to use it to avoid bringing unhappy
beings into the world!" She looked at Dolly, but without waiting for a reply she
went on:
"I should always feel I had wronged these unhappy children," she said. "If
they are not, at any rate they are not unhappy; while if they are unhappy, I alone
should be to blame for it."
ese were the very arguments Darya Alexandrovna had used in her own
reﬂections; but she heard them without understanding them. "How can one
wrong creatures that don’t exist?" she thought. And all at once the idea struck
her: could it possibly, under any circumstances, have been beer for her favorite
Grisha if he had never existed? And this seemed to her so wild, so strange, that
she shook her head to drive away this tangle of whirling, mad ideas.
"No, I don’t know; it’s not right," was all she said, with an expression of
disgust on her face.
"Yes, but you mustn’t forget that you and I…. And besides that," added Anna,

dlxxiv
in spite of the wealth of her arguments and the poverty of Dolly’s objections,
seeming still to admit that it was not right, "don’t forget the chief point, that I am
not now in the same position as you. For you the question is: do you desire not to
have any more children; while for me it is: do I desire to have them? And that’s
a great diﬀerence. You must see that I can’t desire it in my position."
Darya Alexandrovna made no reply. She suddenly felt that she had got far
away from Anna; that there lay between them a barrier of questions on which
they could never agree, and about which it was beer not to speak.

Chapter 
"en there is all the more reason for you to legalize your position, if possible,"
said Dolly.
"Yes, if possible," said Anna, speaking all at once in an uerly diﬀerent tone,
subdued and mournful.
"Surely you don’t mean a divorce is impossible? I was told your husband
had consented to it."
"Dolly, I don’t want to talk about that."
"Oh, we won’t then," Darya Alexandrovna hastened to say, noticing the expression of suﬀering on Anna’s face. "All I see is that you take too gloomy a view
of things."
"I? Not at all! I’m always bright and happy. You see, je fais des passions.
Veslovsky…"
"Yes, to tell the truth, I don’t like Veslovsky’s tone," said Darya Alexandrovna, anxious to change the subject.
"Oh, that’s nonsense! It amuses Alexey, and that’s all; but he’s a boy, and
quite under my control. You know, I turn him as I please. It’s just as it might be
with your Grisha…. Dolly!"—she suddenly changed the subject—"you say I take
too gloomy a view of things. You can’t understand. It’s too awful! I try not to
take any view of it at all."
"But I think you ought to. You ought to do all you can."
"But what can I do? Nothing. You tell me to marry Alexey, and say I don’t
think about it. I don’t think about it!" she repeated, and a ﬂush rose into her face.
She got up, straightening her chest, and sighed heavily. With her light step she
began pacing up and down the room, stopping now and then. "I don’t think of
it? Not a day, not an hour passes that I don’t think of it, and blame myself for
thinking of it … because thinking of that may drive me mad. Drive me mad!" she
repeated. "When I think of it, I can’t sleep without morphine. But never mind.
Let us talk quietly. ey tell me, divorce. In the ﬁrst place, he won’t give me a

dlxxv
divorce. He’s under the inﬂuence of Countess Lidia Ivanovna now."
Darya Alexandrovna, siing erect on a chair, turned her head, following
Anna with a face of sympathetic suﬀering.
"You ought to make the aempt," she said soly.
"Suppose I make the aempt. What does it mean?" she said, evidently giving uerance to a thought, a thousand times thought over and learned by heart.
"It means that I, hating him, but still recognizing that I have wronged him—and
I consider him magnanimous—that I humiliate myself to write to him…. Well,
suppose I make the eﬀort; I do it. Either I receive a humiliating refusal or consent…. Well, I have received his consent, say…" Anna was at that moment at the
furthest end of the room, and she stopped there, doing something to the curtain
at the window. "I receive his consent, but my … my son? ey won’t give him
up to me. He will grow up despising me, with his father, whom I’ve abandoned.
Do you see, I love … equally, I think, but both more than myself—two creatures,
Seryozha and Alexey."
She came out into the middle of the room and stood facing Dolly, with
her arms pressed tightly across her chest. In her white dressing gown her ﬁgure seemed more than usually grand and broad. She bent her head, and with
shining, wet eyes looked from under her brows at Dolly, a thin lile pitiful ﬁgure
in her patched dressing jacket and nightcap, shaking all over with emotion.
"It is only those two creatures that I love, and one excludes the other. I can’t
have them together, and that’s the only thing I want. And since I can’t have that,
I don’t care about the rest. I don’t care about anything, anything. And it will end
one way or another, and so I can’t, I don’t like to talk of it. So don’t blame me,
don’t judge me for anything. You can’t with your pure heart understand all that
I’m suﬀering." She went up, sat down beside Dolly, and with a guilty look, peeped
into her face and took her hand.
"What are you thinking? What are you thinking about me? Don’t despise
me. I don’t deserve contempt. I’m simply unhappy. If anyone is unhappy, I am,"
she articulated, and turning away, she burst into tears.
Le alone, Darya Alexandrovna said her prayers and went to bed. She had
felt for Anna with all her heart while she was speaking to her, but now she could
not force herself to think of her. e memories of home and of her children rose
up in her imagination with a peculiar charm quite new to her, with a sort of new
brilliance. at world of her own seemed to her now so sweet and precious that
she would not on any account spend an extra day outside it, and she made up her
mind that she would certainly go back next day.
Anna meantime went back to her boudoir, took a wine glass and dropped
into it several drops of a medicine, of which the principal ingredient was morphine. Aer drinking it oﬀ and siing still a lile while, she went into her bed-

dlxxvi
room in a soothed and more cheerful frame of mind.
When she went into the bedroom, Vronsky looked intently at her. He was
looking for traces of the conversation which he knew that, staying so long in
Dolly’s room, she must have had with her. But in her expression of restrained
excitement, and of a sort of reserve, he could ﬁnd nothing but the beauty that
always bewitched him afresh though he was used to it, the consciousness of it,
and the desire that it should aﬀect him. He did not want to ask her what they
had been talking of, but he hoped that she would tell him something of her own
accord. But she only said:
"I am so glad you like Dolly. You do, don’t you?"
"Oh, I’ve known her a long while, you know. She’s very good-hearted, I
suppose, mais excessivement terre-à-terre. Still, I’m very glad to see her."
He took Anna’s hand and looked inquiringly into her eyes.
Misinterpreting the look, she smiled to him. Next morning, in spite of the
protests of her hosts, Darya Alexandrovna prepared for her homeward journey.
Levin’s coachman, in his by no means new coat and shabby hat, with his illmatched horses and his coach with the patched mud-guards, drove with gloomy
determination into the covered gravel approach.
Darya Alexandrovna disliked taking leave of Princess Varvara and the gentlemen of the party. Aer a day spent together, both she and her hosts were
distinctly aware that they did not get on together, and that it was beer for them
not to meet. Only Anna was sad. She knew that now, from Dolly’s departure, no
one again would stir up within her soul the feelings that had been roused by their
conversation. It hurt her to stir up these feelings, but yet she knew that that was
the best part of her soul, and that that part of her soul would quickly be smothered
in the life she was leading.
As she drove out into the open country, Darya Alexandrovna had a delightful sense of relief, and she felt tempted to ask the two men how they had
liked being at Vronsky’s, when suddenly the coachman, Philip, expressed himself
unasked:
"Rolling in wealth they may be, but three pots of oats was all they gave us.
Everything cleared up till there wasn’t a grain le by cockcrow. What are three
pots? A mere mouthful! And oats now down to forty-ﬁve kopecks. At our place,
no fear, all comers may have as much as they can eat."
"e master’s a screw," put in the counting house clerk.
"Well, did you like their horses?" asked Dolly.
"e horses!—there’s no two opinions about them. And the food was good.
But it seemed to me sort of dreary there, Darya Alexandrovna. I don’t know what
you thought," he said, turning his handsome, good-natured face to her.
"I thought so too. Well, shall we get home by evening?"

dlxxvii
"Eh, we must!"
On reaching home and ﬁnding everyone entirely satisfactory and particularly charming, Darya Alexandrovna began with great liveliness telling them how
she had arrived, how warmly they had received her, of the luxury and good taste
in which the Vronskys lived, and of their recreations, and she would not allow a
word to be said against them.
"One has to know Anna and Vronsky—I have got to know him beer
now—to see how nice they are, and how touching," she said, speaking now with
perfect sincerity, and forgeing the vague feeling of dissatisfaction and awkwardness she had experienced there.

Chapter 
Vronsky and Anna spent the whole summer and part of the winter in the country,
living in just the same condition, and still taking no steps to obtain a divorce. It
was an understood thing between them that they should not go away anywhere;
but both felt, the longer they lived alone, especially in the autumn, without guests
in the house, that they could not stand this existence, and that they would have
to alter it.
eir life was apparently such that nothing beer could be desired. ey
had the fullest abundance of everything; they had a child, and both had occupation. Anna devoted just as much care to her appearance when they had no visitors,
and she did a great deal of reading, both of novels and of what serious literature
was in fashion. She ordered all the books that were praised in the foreign papers
and reviews she received, and read them with that concentrated aention which
is only given to what is read in seclusion. Moreover, every subject that was of
interest to Vronsky, she studied in books and special journals, so that he oen
went straight to her with questions relating to agriculture or architecture, sometimes even with questions relating to horse-breeding or sport. He was amazed
at her knowledge, her memory, and at ﬁrst was disposed to doubt it, to ask for
conﬁrmation of her facts; and she would ﬁnd what he asked for in some book, and
show it to him.
e building of the hospital, too, interested her. She did not merely assist,
but planned and suggested a great deal herself. But her chief thought was still
of herself—how far she was dear to Vronsky, how far she could make up to him
for all he had given up. Vronsky appreciated this desire not only to please, but
to serve him, which had become the sole aim of her existence, but at the same
time he wearied of the loving snares in which she tried to hold him fast. As time
went on, and he saw himself more and more oen held fast in these snares, he

dlxxviii
had an ever growing desire, not so much to escape from them, as to try whether
they hindered his freedom. Had it not been for this growing desire to be free, not
to have scenes every time he wanted to go to the town to a meeting or a race,
Vronsky would have been perfectly satisﬁed with his life. e rôle he had taken
up, the rôle of a wealthy landowner, one of that class which ought to be the very
heart of the Russian aristocracy, was entirely to his taste; and now, aer spending six months in that character, he derived even greater satisfaction from it. And
his management of his estate, which occupied and absorbed him more and more,
was most successful. In spite of the immense sums cost him by the hospital, by
machinery, by cows ordered from Switzerland, and many other things, he was
convinced that he was not wasting, but increasing his substance. In all maers
aﬀecting income, the sales of timber, wheat, and wool, the leing of lands, Vronsky was hard as a rock, and knew well how to keep up prices. In all operations
on a large scale on this and his other estates, he kept to the simplest methods involving no risk, and in triﬂing details he was careful and exacting to an extreme
degree. In spite of all the cunning and ingenuity of the German steward, who
would try to tempt him into purchases by making his original estimate always
far larger than really required, and then representing to Vronsky that he might
get the thing cheaper, and so make a proﬁt, Vronsky did not give in. He listened
to his steward, cross-examined him, and only agreed to his suggestions when the
implement to be ordered or constructed was the very newest, not yet known in
Russia, and likely to excite wonder. Apart from such exceptions, he resolved upon
an increased outlay only where there was a surplus, and in making such an outlay he went into the minutest details, and insisted on geing the very best for his
money; so that by the method on which he managed his aﬀairs, it was clear that
he was not wasting, but increasing his substance.
In October there were the provincial elections in the Kashinsky province,
where were the estates of Vronsky, Sviazhsky, Koznishev, Oblonsky, and a small
part of Levin’s land.
ese elections were aracting public aention from several circumstances
connected with them, and also from the people taking part in them. ere had
been a great deal of talk about them, and great preparations were being made for
them. Persons who never aended the elections were coming from Moscow, from
Petersburg, and from abroad to aend these. Vronsky had long before promised
Sviazhsky to go to them. Before the elections Sviazhsky, who oen visited Vozdvizhenskoe, drove over to fetch Vronsky. On the day before there had been almost
a quarrel between Vronsky and Anna over this proposed expedition. It was the
very dullest autumn weather, which is so dreary in the country, and so, preparing
himself for a struggle, Vronsky, with a hard and cold expression, informed Anna
of his departure as he had never spoken to her before. But, to his surprise, Anna

dlxxix
accepted the information with great composure, and merely asked when he would
be back. He looked intently at her, at a loss to explain this composure. She smiled
at his look. He knew that way she had of withdrawing into herself, and knew that
it only happened when she had determined upon something without leing him
know her plans. He was afraid of this; but he was so anxious to avoid a scene that
he kept up appearances, and half sincerely believed in what he longed to believe
in—her reasonableness.
"I hope you won’t be dull?"
"I hope not," said Anna. "I got a box of books yesterday from Gautier’s. No,
I shan’t be dull."
"She’s trying to take that tone, and so much the beer," he thought, "or else
it would be the same thing over and over again."
And he set oﬀ for the elections without appealing to her for a candid explanation. It was the ﬁrst time since the beginning of their intimacy that he had
parted from her without a full explanation. From one point of view this troubled
him, but on the other side he felt that it was beer so. "At ﬁrst there will be, as this
time, something undeﬁned kept back, and then she will get used to it. In any case
I can give up anything for her, but not my masculine independence," he thought.

Chapter 
In September Levin moved to Moscow for Kiy’s conﬁnement. He had spent a
whole month in Moscow with nothing to do, when Sergey Ivanovitch, who had
property in the Kashinsky province, and took great interest in the question of
the approaching elections, made ready to set oﬀ to the elections. He invited his
brother, who had a vote in the Seleznevsky district, to come with him. Levin had,
moreover, to transact in Kashin some extremely important business relating to
the wardship of land and to the receiving of certain redemption money for his
sister, who was abroad.
Levin still hesitated, but Kiy, who saw that he was bored in Moscow, and
urged him to go, on her own authority ordered him the proper nobleman’s uniform, costing seven pounds. And that seven pounds paid for the uniform was the
chief cause that ﬁnally decided Levin to go. He went to Kashin….
Levin had been six days in Kashin, visiting the assembly each day, and busily
engaged about his sister’s business, which still dragged on. e district marshals
of nobility were all occupied with the elections, and it was impossible to get the
simplest thing done that depended upon the court of wardship. e other maer,
the payment of the sums due, was met too by diﬃculties. Aer long negotiations
over the legal details, the money was at last ready to be paid; but the notary, a

dlxxx
most obliging person, could not hand over the order, because it must have the
signature of the president, and the president, though he had not given over his
duties to a deputy, was at the elections. All these worrying negotiations, this
endless going from place to place, and talking with pleasant and excellent people,
who quite saw the unpleasantness of the petitioner’s position, but were powerless
to assist him—all these eﬀorts that yielded no result, led to a feeling of misery in
Levin akin to the mortifying helplessness one experiences in dreams when one
tries to use physical force. He felt this frequently as he talked to his most goodnatured solicitor. is solicitor did, it seemed, everything possible, and strained
every nerve to get him out of his diﬃculties. "I tell you what you might try," he
said more than once; "go to so-and-so and so-and-so," and the solicitor drew up
a regular plan for geing round the fatal point that hindered everything. But
he would add immediately, "It’ll mean some delay, anyway, but you might try
it." And Levin did try, and did go. Everyone was kind and civil, but the point
evaded seemed to crop up again in the end, and again to bar the way. What
was particularly trying, was that Levin could not make out with whom he was
struggling, to whose interest it was that his business should not be done. at
no one seemed to know; the solicitor certainly did not know. If Levin could have
understood why, just as he saw why one can only approach the booking oﬃce of
a railway station in single ﬁle, it would not have been so vexatious and tiresome
to him. But with the hindrances that confronted him in his business, no one could
explain why they existed.
But Levin had changed a good deal since his marriage; he was patient, and
if he could not see why it was all arranged like this, he told himself that he could
not judge without knowing all about it, and that most likely it must be so, and he
tried not to fret.
In aending the elections, too, and taking part in them, he tried now not
to judge, not to fall foul of them, but to comprehend as fully as he could the
question which was so earnestly and ardently absorbing honest and excellent men
whom he respected. Since his marriage there had been revealed to Levin so many
new and serious aspects of life that had previously, through his frivolous aitude
to them, seemed of no importance, that in the question of the elections too he
assumed and tried to ﬁnd some serious signiﬁcance.
Sergey Ivanovitch explained to him the meaning and object of the proposed
revolution at the elections. e marshal of the province in whose hands the law
had placed the control of so many important public functions—the guardianship of
wards (the very department which was giving Levin so much trouble just now),
the disposal of large sums subscribed by the nobility of the province, the high
schools, female, male, and military, and popular instruction on the new model,
and ﬁnally, the district council—the marshal of the province, Snetkov, was a no-

dlxxxi
bleman of the old school,—dissipating an immense fortune, a good-hearted man,
honest aer his own fashion, but uerly without any comprehension of the needs
of modern days. He always took, in every question, the side of the nobility; he
was positively antagonistic to the spread of popular education, and he succeeded
in giving a purely party character to the district council which ought by rights to
be of such an immense importance. What was needed was to put in his place a
fresh, capable, perfectly modern man, of contemporary ideas, and to frame their
policy so as from the rights conferred upon the nobles, not as the nobility, but
as an element of the district council, to extract all the powers of self-government
that could possibly be derived from them. In the wealthy Kashinsky province,
which always took the lead of other provinces in everything, there was now such
a preponderance of forces that this policy, once carried through properly there,
might serve as a model for other provinces for all Russia. And hence the whole
question was of the greatest importance. It was proposed to elect as marshal in
place of Snetkov either Sviazhsky, or, beer still, Nevyedovsky, a former university professor, a man of remarkable intelligence and a great friend of Sergey
Ivanovitch.
e meeting was opened by the governor, who made a speech to the nobles,
urging them to elect the public functionaries, not from regard for persons, but for
the service and welfare of their fatherland, and hoping that the honorable nobility
of the Kashinsky province would, as at all former elections, hold their duty as
sacred, and vindicate the exalted conﬁdence of the monarch.
When he had ﬁnished with his speech, the governor walked out of the hall,
and the noblemen noisily and eagerly—some even enthusiastically—followed him
and thronged round him while he put on his fur coat and conversed amicably
with the marshal of the province. Levin, anxious to see into everything and not to
miss anything, stood there too in the crowd, and heard the governor say: "Please
tell Marya Ivanovna my wife is very sorry she couldn’t come to the Home." And
thereupon the nobles in high good-humor sorted out their fur coats and all drove
oﬀ to the cathedral.
In the cathedral Levin, liing his hand like the rest and repeating the words
of the archdeacon, swore with most terrible oaths to do all the governor had hoped
they would do. Church services always aﬀected Levin, and as he uered the words
"I kiss the cross," and glanced round at the crowd of young and old men repeating
the same, he felt touched.
On the second and third days there was business relating to the ﬁnances
of the nobility and the female high school, of no importance whatever, as Sergey
Ivanovitch explained, and Levin, busy seeing aer his own aﬀairs, did not aend
the meetings. On the fourth day the auditing of the marshal’s accounts took place
at the high table of the marshal of the province. And then there occurred the

dlxxxii
ﬁrst skirmish between the new party and the old. e commiee who had been
deputed to verify the accounts reported to the meeting that all was in order. e
marshal of the province got up, thanked the nobility for their conﬁdence, and
shed tears. e nobles gave him a loud welcome, and shook hands with him. But
at that instant a nobleman of Sergey Ivanovitch’s party said that he had heard
that the commiee had not veriﬁed the accounts, considering such a veriﬁcation
an insult to the marshal of the province. One of the members of the commiee
incautiously admied this. en a small gentleman, very young-looking but very
malignant, began to say that it would probably be agreeable to the marshal of the
province to give an account of his expenditures of the public moneys, and that the
misplaced delicacy of the members of the commiee was depriving him of this
moral satisfaction. en the members of the commiee tried to withdraw their
admission, and Sergey Ivanovitch began to prove that they must logically admit
either that they had veriﬁed the accounts or that they had not, and he developed
this dilemma in detail. Sergey Ivanovitch was answered by the spokesman of the
opposite party. en Sviazhsky spoke, and then the malignant gentleman again.
e discussion lasted a long time and ended in nothing. Levin was surprised that
they should dispute upon this subject so long, especially as, when he asked Sergey
Ivanovitch whether he supposed that money had been misappropriated, Sergey
Ivanovitch answered:
"Oh, no! He’s an honest man. But those old-fashioned methods of paternal family arrangements in the management of provincial aﬀairs must be broken
down."
On the ﬁh day came the elections of the district marshals. It was rather a
stormy day in several districts. In the Seleznevsky district Sviazhsky was elected
unanimously without a ballot, and he gave a dinner that evening.

Chapter 
e sixth day was ﬁxed for the election of the marshal of the province.
e rooms, large and small, were full of noblemen in all sorts of uniforms.
Many had come only for that day. Men who had not seen each other for years,
some from the Crimea, some from Petersburg, some from abroad, met in the rooms
of the Hall of Nobility. ere was much discussion around the governor’s table
under the portrait of the Tsar.
e nobles, both in the larger and the smaller rooms, grouped themselves
in camps, and from their hostile and suspicious glances, from the silence that fell
upon them when outsiders approached a group, and from the way that some,
whispering together, retreated to the farther corridor, it was evident that each

dlxxxiii
side had secrets from the other. In appearance the noblemen were sharply divided
into two classes: the old and the new. e old were for the most part either in
old uniforms of the nobility, buoned up closely, with spurs and hats, or in their
own special naval, cavalry, infantry, or oﬃcial uniforms. e uniforms of the older
men were embroidered in the old-fashioned way with epaulets on their shoulders;
they were unmistakably tight and short in the waist, as though their wearers had
grown out of them. e younger men wore the uniform of the nobility with long
waists and broad shoulders, unbuoned over white waistcoats, or uniforms with
black collars and with the embroidered badges of justices of the peace. To the
younger men belonged the court uniforms that here and there brightened up the
crowd.
But the division into young and old did not correspond with the division
of parties. Some of the young men, as Levin observed, belonged to the old party;
and some of the very oldest noblemen, on the contrary, were whispering with
Sviazhsky, and were evidently ardent partisans of the new party.
Levin stood in the smaller room, where they were smoking and taking light
refreshments, close to his own friends, and listening to what they were saying, he
conscientiously exerted all his intelligence trying to understand what was said.
Sergey Ivanovitch was the center round which the others grouped themselves. He
was listening at that moment to Sviazhsky and Hliustov, the marshal of another
district, who belonged to their party. Hliustov would not agree to go with his
district to ask Snetkov to stand, while Sviazhsky was persuading him to do so,
and Sergey Ivanovitch was approving of the plan. Levin could not make out why
the opposition was to ask the marshal to stand whom they wanted to supersede.
Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just been drinking and taking some lunch,
came up to them in his uniform of a gentleman of the bedchamber, wiping his lips
with a perfumed handkerchief of bordered batiste.
"We are placing our forces," he said, pulling out his whiskers, "Sergey
Ivanovitch!"
And listening to the conversation, he supported Sviazhsky’s contention.
"One district’s enough, and Sviazhsky’s obviously of the opposition," he said,
words evidently intelligible to all except Levin.
"Why, Kostya, you here too! I suppose you’re converted, eh?" he added,
turning to Levin and drawing his arm through his. Levin would have been glad
indeed to be converted, but could not make out what the point was, and retreating
a few steps from the speakers, he explained to Stepan Arkadyevitch his inability
to understand why the marshal of the province should be asked to stand.
"O sancta simplicitas!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and brieﬂy and clearly he
explained it to Levin. If, as at previous elections, all the districts asked the marshal
of the province to stand, then he would be elected without a ballot. at must

dlxxxiv
not be. Now eight districts had agreed to call upon him: if two refused to do so,
Snetkov might decline to stand at all; and then the old party might choose another
of their party, which would throw them completely out in their reckoning. But if
only one district, Sviazhsky’s, did not call upon him to stand, Snetkov would let
himself be balloted for. ey were even, some of them, going to vote for him, and
purposely to let him get a good many votes, so that the enemy might be thrown oﬀ
the scent, and when a candidate of the other side was put up, they too might give
him some votes. Levin understood to some extent, but not fully, and would have
put a few more questions, when suddenly everyone began talking and making a
noise and they moved towards the big room.
"What is it? eh? whom?" "No guarantee? whose? what?" "ey won’t
pass him?" "No guarantee?" "ey won’t let Flerov in?" "Eh, because of the charge
against him?" "Why, at this rate, they won’t admit anyone. It’s a swindle!" "e
law!" Levin heard exclamations on all sides, and he moved into the big room together with the others, all hurrying somewhere and afraid of missing something.
Squeezed by the crowding noblemen, he drew near the high table where the marshal of the province, Sviazhsky, and the other leaders were hotly disputing about
something.

Chapter 
Levin was standing rather far oﬀ. A nobleman breathing heavily and hoarsely
at his side, and another whose thick boots were creaking, prevented him from
hearing distinctly. He could only hear the so voice of the marshal faintly, then
the shrill voice of the malignant gentleman, and then the voice of Sviazhsky. ey
were disputing, as far as he could make out, as to the interpretation to be put on
the act and the exact meaning of the words: "liable to be called up for trial."
e crowd parted to make way for Sergey Ivanovitch approaching the table.
Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till the malignant gentleman had ﬁnished speaking,
said that he thought the best solution would be to refer to the act itself, and asked
the secretary to ﬁnd the act. e act said that in case of diﬀerence of opinion,
there must be a ballot.
Sergey Ivanovitch read the act and began to explain its meaning, but at that
point a tall, stout, round-shouldered landowner, with dyed whiskers, in a tight
uniform that cut the back of his neck, interrupted him. He went up to the table,
and striking it with his ﬁnger ring, he shouted loudly: "A ballot! Put it to the vote!
No need for more talking!" en several voices began to talk all at once, and the
tall nobleman with the ring, geing more and more exasperated, shouted more
and more loudly. But it was impossible to make out what he said.

dlxxxv
He was shouting for the very course Sergey Ivanovitch had proposed; but it
was evident that he hated him and all his party, and this feeling of hatred spread
through the whole party and roused in opposition to it the same vindictiveness,
though in a more seemly form, on the other side. Shouts were raised, and for
a moment all was confusion, so that the marshal of the province had to call for
order.
"A ballot! A ballot! Every nobleman sees it! We shed our blood for our
country!… e conﬁdence of the monarch…. No checking the accounts of the
marshal; he’s not a cashier…. But that’s not the point…. Votes, please! Beastly!…"
shouted furious and violent voices on all sides. Looks and faces were even more
violent and furious than their words. ey expressed the most implacable hatred.
Levin did not in the least understand what was the maer, and he marveled at
the passion with which it was disputed whether or not the decision about Flerov
should be put to the vote. He forgot, as Sergey Ivanovitch explained to him afterwards, this syllogism: that it was necessary for the public good to get rid of
the marshal of the province; that to get rid of the marshal it was necessary to
have a majority of votes; that to get a majority of votes it was necessary to secure
Flerov’s right to vote; that to secure the recognition of Flerov’s right to vote they
must decide on the interpretation to be put on the act.
"And one vote may decide the whole question, and one must be serious and
consecutive, if one wants to be of use in public life," concluded Sergey Ivanovitch.
But Levin forgot all that, and it was painful to him to see all these excellent persons, for whom he had a respect, in such an unpleasant and vicious state of excitement. To escape from this painful feeling he went away into the other room
where there was nobody except the waiters at the refreshment bar. Seeing the
waiters busy over washing up the crockery and seing in order their plates and
wine glasses, seeing their calm and cheerful faces, Levin felt an unexpected sense
of relief as though he had come out of a stuﬀy room into the fresh air. He began
walking up and down, looking with pleasure at the waiters. He particularly liked
the way one gray-whiskered waiter, who showed his scorn for the other younger
ones and was jeered at by them, was teaching them how to fold up napkins properly. Levin was just about to enter into conversation with the old waiter, when
the secretary of the court of wardship, a lile old man whose specialty it was to
know all the noblemen of the province by name and patronymic, drew him away.
"Please come, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," he said, "your brother’s looking for
you. ey are voting on the legal point."
Levin walked into the room, received a white ball, and followed his brother,
Sergey Ivanovitch, to the table where Sviazhsky was standing with a signiﬁcant
and ironical face, holding his beard in his ﬁst and sniﬃng at it. Sergey Ivanovitch
put his hand into the box, put the ball somewhere, and making room for Levin,

dlxxxvi
stopped. Levin advanced, but uerly forgeing what he was to do, and much
embarrassed, he turned to Sergey Ivanovitch with the question, "Where am I to
put it?" He asked this soly, at a moment when there was talking going on near, so
that he had hoped his question would not be overheard. But the persons speaking
paused, and his improper question was overheard. Sergey Ivanovitch frowned.
"at is a maer for each man’s own decision," he said severely.
Several people smiled. Levin crimsoned, hurriedly thrust his hand under
the cloth, and put the ball to the right as it was in his right hand. Having put it in,
he recollected that he ought to have thrust his le hand too, and so he thrust it in
though too late, and, still more overcome with confusion, he beat a hasty retreat
into the background.
"A hundred and twenty-six for admission! Ninety-eight against!" sang out
the voice of the secretary, who could not pronounce the leer r. en there was a
laugh; a buon and two nuts were found in the box. e nobleman was allowed
the right to vote, and the new party had conquered.
But the old party did not consider themselves conquered. Levin heard that
they were asking Snetkov to stand, and he saw that a crowd of noblemen was
surrounding the marshal, who was saying something. Levin went nearer. In reply
Snetkov spoke of the trust the noblemen of the province had placed in him, the
aﬀection they had shown him, which he did not deserve, as his only merit had
been his aachment to the nobility, to whom he had devoted twelve years of
service. Several times he repeated the words: "I have served to the best of my
powers with truth and good faith, I value your goodness and thank you," and
suddenly he stopped short from the tears that choked him, and went out of the
room. Whether these tears came from a sense of the injustice being done him,
from his love for the nobility, or from the strain of the position he was placed
in, feeling himself surrounded by enemies, his emotion infected the assembly, the
majority were touched, and Levin felt a tenderness for Snetkov.
In the doorway the marshal of the province jostled against Levin.
"Beg pardon, excuse me, please," he said as to a stranger, but recognizing
Levin, he smiled timidly. It seemed to Levin that he would have liked to say
something, but could not speak for emotion. His face and his whole ﬁgure in his
uniform with the crosses, and white trousers striped with braid, as he moved hurriedly along, reminded Levin of some hunted beast who sees that he is in evil case.
is expression in the marshal’s face was particularly touching to Levin, because,
only the day before, he had been at his house about his trustee business and had
seen him in all his grandeur, a kind-hearted, fatherly man. e big house with the
old family furniture; the rather dirty, far from stylish, but respectful footmen, unmistakably old house serfs who had stuck to their master; the stout, good-natured
wife in a cap with lace and a Turkish shawl, peing her prey grandchild, her

dlxxxvii
daughter’s daughter; the young son, a sixth form high school boy, coming home
from school, and greeting his father, kissing his big hand; the genuine, cordial
words and gestures of the old man—all this had the day before roused an instinctive feeling of respect and sympathy in Levin. is old man was a touching and
pathetic ﬁgure to Levin now, and he longed to say something pleasant to him.
"So you’re sure to be our marshal again," he said.
"It’s not likely," said the marshal, looking round with a scared expression.
"I’m worn out, I’m old. If there are men younger and more deserving than I, let
them serve."
And the marshal disappeared through a side door.
e most solemn moment was at hand. ey were to proceed immediately
to the election. e leaders of both parties were reckoning white and black on
their ﬁngers.
e discussion upon Flerov had given the new party not only Flerov’s vote,
but had also gained time for them, so that they could send to fetch three noblemen
who had been rendered unable to take part in the elections by the wiles of the
other party. Two noble gentlemen, who had a weakness for strong drink, had
been made drunk by the partisans of Snetkov, and a third had been robbed of his
uniform.
On learning this, the new party had made haste, during the dispute about
Flerov, to send some of their men in a sledge to clothe the stripped gentleman,
and to bring along one of the intoxicated to the meeting.
"I’ve brought one, drenched him with water," said the landowner, who had
gone on this errand, to Sviazhsky. "He’s all right? he’ll do."
"Not too drunk, he won’t fall down?" said Sviazhsky, shaking his head.
"No, he’s ﬁrst-rate. If only they don’t give him any more here…. I’ve told
the waiter not to give him anything on any account."

Chapter 
e narrow room, in which they were smoking and taking refreshments, was full
of noblemen. e excitement grew more intense, and every face betrayed some
uneasiness. e excitement was specially keen for the leaders of each party, who
knew every detail, and had reckoned up every vote. ey were the generals organizing the approaching bale. e rest, like the rank and ﬁle before an engagement, though they were geing ready for the ﬁght, sought for other distractions
in the interval. Some were lunching, standing at the bar, or siing at the table;
others were walking up and down the long room, smoking cigarees, and talking
with friends whom they had not seen for a long while.

dlxxxviii
Levin did not care to eat, and he was not smoking; he did not want to join
his own friends, that is Sergey Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch, Sviazhsky and
the rest, because Vronsky in his equerry’s uniform was standing with them in
eager conversation. Levin had seen him already at the meeting on the previous
day, and he had studiously avoided him, not caring to greet him. He went to the
window and sat down, scanning the groups, and listening to what was being said
around him. He felt depressed, especially because everyone else was, as he saw,
eager, anxious, and interested, and he alone, with an old, toothless lile man with
mumbling lips wearing a naval uniform, siing beside him, had no interest in it
and nothing to do.
"He’s such a blackguard! I have told him so, but it makes no diﬀerence. Only
think of it! He couldn’t collect it in three years!" he heard vigorously uered by
a round-shouldered, short, country gentleman, who had pomaded hair hanging
on his embroidered collar, and new boots obviously put on for the occasion, with
heels that tapped energetically as he spoke. Casting a displeased glance at Levin,
this gentleman sharply turned his back.
"Yes, it’s a dirty business, there’s no denying," a small gentleman assented
in a high voice.
Next, a whole crowd of country gentlemen, surrounding a stout general,
hurriedly came near Levin. ese persons were unmistakably seeking a place
where they could talk without being overheard.
"How dare he say I had his breeches stolen! Pawned them for drink, I expect.
Damn the fellow, prince indeed! He’d beer not say it, the beast!"
"But excuse me! ey take their stand on the act," was being said in another
group; "the wife must be registered as noble."
"Oh, damn your acts! I speak from my heart. We’re all gentlemen, aren’t
we? Above suspicion."
"Shall we go on, your excellency, ﬁne ampagne?"
Another group was following a nobleman, who was shouting something in
a loud voice; it was one of the three intoxicated gentlemen.
"I always advised Marya Semyonovna to let for a fair rent, for she can never
save a proﬁt," he heard a pleasant voice say. e speaker was a country gentleman
with gray whiskers, wearing the regimental uniform of an old general staﬀ-oﬃcer.
It was the very landowner Levin had met at Sviazhsky’s. He knew him at once.
e landowner too stared at Levin, and they exchanged greetings.
"Very glad to see you! To be sure! I remember you very well. Last year at
our district marshal, Nikolay Ivanovitch’s."
"Well, and how is your land doing?" asked Levin.
"Oh, still just the same, always at a loss," the landowner answered with a
resigned smile, but with an expression of serenity and conviction that so it must

dlxxxix
be. "And how do you come to be in our province?" he asked. "Come to take part
in our coup d’état?" he said, conﬁdently pronouncing the French words with a bad
accent. "All Russia’s here—gentlemen of the bedchamber, and everything short of
the ministry." He pointed to the imposing ﬁgure of Stepan Arkadyevitch in white
trousers and his court uniform, walking by with a general.
"I ought to own that I don’t very well understand the dri of the provincial
elections," said Levin.
e landowner looked at him.
"Why, what is there to understand? ere’s no meaning in it at all. It’s a
decaying institution that goes on running only by the force of inertia. Just look,
the very uniforms tell you that it’s an assembly of justices of the peace, permanent
members of the court, and so on, but not of noblemen."
"en why do you come?" asked Levin.
"From habit, nothing else. en, too, one must keep up connections. It’s a
moral obligation of a sort. And then, to tell the truth, there’s one’s own interests.
My son-in-law wants to stand as a permanent member; they’re not rich people,
and he must be brought forward. ese gentlemen, now, what do they come for?"
he said, pointing to the malignant gentleman, who was talking at the high table.
"at’s the new generation of nobility."
"New it may be, but nobility it isn’t. ey’re proprietors of a sort, but we’re
the landowners. As noblemen, they’re cuing their own throats."
"But you say it’s an institution that’s served its time."
"at it may be, but still it ought to be treated a lile more respectfully.
Snetkov, now…. We may be of use, or we may not, but we’re the growth of a
thousand years. If we’re laying out a garden, planning one before the house, you
know, and there you’ve a tree that’s stood for centuries in the very spot…. Old
and gnarled it may be, and yet you don’t cut down the old fellow to make room
for the ﬂowerbeds, but lay out your beds so as to take advantage of the tree. You
won’t grow him again in a year," he said cautiously, and he immediately changed
the conversation. "Well, and how is your land doing?"
"Oh, not very well. I make ﬁve per cent."
"Yes, but you don’t reckon your own work. Aren’t you worth something
too? I’ll tell you my own case. Before I took to seeing aer the land, I had a salary
of three hundred pounds from the service. Now I do more work than I did in the
service, and like you I get ﬁve per cent. on the land, and thank God for that. But
one’s work is thrown in for nothing."
"en why do you do it, if it’s a clear loss?"
"Oh, well, one does it! What would you have? It’s habit, and one knows it’s
how it should be. And what’s more," the landowner went on, leaning his elbows
on the window and chaing on, "my son, I must tell you, has no taste for it. ere’s

dxc
no doubt he’ll be a scientiﬁc man. So there’ll be no one to keep it up. And yet one
does it. Here this year I’ve planted an orchard."
"Yes, yes," said Levin, "that’s perfectly true. I always feel there’s no real
balance of gain in my work on the land, and yet one does it…. It’s a sort of duty
one feels to the land."
"But I tell you what," the landowner pursued; "a neighbor of mine, a merchant, was at my place. We walked about the ﬁelds and the garden. ‘No,’ said he,
‘Stepan Vassilievitch, everything’s well looked aer, but your garden’s neglected.’
But, as a fact, it’s well kept up. ‘To my thinking, I’d cut down that lime-tree. Here
you’ve thousands of limes, and each would make two good bundles of bark. And
nowadays that bark’s worth something. I’d cut down the lot.’"
"And with what he made he’d increase his stock, or buy some land for a
triﬂe, and let it out in lots to the peasants," Levin added, smiling. He had evidently
more than once come across those commercial calculations. "And he’d make his
fortune. But you and I must thank God if we keep what we’ve got and leave it to
our children."
"You’re married, I’ve heard?" said the landowner.
"Yes," Levin answered, with proud satisfaction. "Yes, it’s rather strange," he
went on. "So we live without making anything, as though we were ancient vestals
set to keep in a ﬁre."
e landowner chuckled under his white mustaches.
"ere are some among us, too, like our friend Nikolay Ivanovitch, or Count
Vronsky, that’s seled here lately, who try to carry on their husbandry as though
it were a factory; but so far it leads to nothing but making away with capital on
it."
"But why is it we don’t do like the merchants? Why don’t we cut down our
parks for timber?" said Levin, returning to a thought that had struck him.
"Why, as you said, to keep the ﬁre in. Besides that’s not work for a nobleman. And our work as noblemen isn’t done here at the elections, but yonder, each
in our corner. ere’s a class instinct, too, of what one ought and oughtn’t to do.
ere’s the peasants, too, I wonder at them sometimes; any good peasant tries to
take all the land he can. However bad the land is, he’ll work it. Without a return
too. At a simple loss."
"Just as we do," said Levin. "Very, very glad to have met you," he added,
seeing Sviazhsky approaching him.
"And here we’ve met for the ﬁrst time since we met at your place," said the
landowner to Sviazhsky, "and we’ve had a good talk too."
"Well, have you been aacking the new order of things?" said Sviazhsky
with a smile.
"at we’re bound to do."

dxci
"You’ve relieved your feelings?"

Chapter 
Sviazhsky took Levin’s arm, and went with him to his own friends. is time
there was no avoiding Vronsky. He was standing with Stepan Arkadyevitch and
Sergey Ivanovitch, and looking straight at Levin as he drew near.
"Delighted! I believe I’ve had the pleasure of meeting you … at Princess
Shtcherbatskaya’s," he said, giving Levin his hand.
"Yes, I quite remember our meeting," said Levin, and blushing crimson, he
turned away immediately, and began talking to his brother.
With a slight smile Vronsky went on talking to Sviazhsky, obviously without
the slightest inclination to enter into conversation with Levin. But Levin, as he
talked to his brother, was continually looking round at Vronsky, trying to think
of something to say to him to gloss over his rudeness.
"What are we waiting for now?" asked Levin, looking at Sviazhsky and
Vronsky.
"For Snetkov. He has to refuse or to consent to stand," answered Sviazhsky.
"Well, and what has he done, consented or not?"
"at’s the point, that he’s done neither," said Vronsky.
"And if he refuses, who will stand then?" asked Levin, looking at Vronsky.
"Whoever chooses to," said Sviazhsky.
"Shall you?" asked Levin.
"Certainly not I," said Sviazhsky, looking confused, and turning an alarmed
glance at the malignant gentleman, who was standing beside Sergey Ivanovitch.
"Who then? Nevyedovsky?" said Levin, feeling he was puing his foot into
it.
But this was worse still. Nevyedovsky and Sviazhsky were the two candidates.
"I certainly shall not, under any circumstances," answered the malignant
gentleman.
is was Nevyedovsky himself. Sviazhsky introduced him to Levin.
"Well, you ﬁnd it exciting too?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, winking at Vronsky. "It’s something like a race. One might bet on it."
"Yes, it is keenly exciting," said Vronsky. "And once taking the thing up, one’s
eager to see it through. It’s a ﬁght!" he said, scowling and seing his powerful
jaws.
"What a capable fellow Sviazhsky is! Sees it all so clearly."
"Oh, yes!" Vronsky assented indiﬀerently.

dxcii
A silence followed, during which Vronsky—since he had to look at something—looked at Levin, at his feet, at his uniform, then at his face, and noticing
his gloomy eyes ﬁxed upon him, he said, in order to say something:
"How is it that you, living constantly in the country, are not a justice of the
peace? You are not in the uniform of one."
"It’s because I consider that the justice of the peace is a silly institution,"
Levin answered gloomily. He had been all the time looking for an opportunity to
enter into conversation with Vronsky, so as to smooth over his rudeness at their
ﬁrst meeting.
"I don’t think so, quite the contrary," Vronsky said, with quiet surprise.
"It’s a plaything," Levin cut him short. "We don’t want justices of the peace.
I’ve never had a single thing to do with them during eight years. And what I have
had was decided wrongly by them. e justice of the peace is over thirty miles
from me. For some maer of two roubles I should have to send a lawyer, who
costs me ﬁeen."
And he related how a peasant had stolen some ﬂour from the miller, and
when the miller told him of it, had lodged a complaint for slander. All this was
uerly uncalled for and stupid, and Levin felt it himself as he said it.
"Oh, this is such an original fellow!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch with his most
soothing, almond-oil smile. "But come along; I think they’re voting…."
And they separated.
"I can’t understand," said Sergey Ivanovitch, who had observed his brother’s
clumsiness, "I can’t understand how anyone can be so absolutely devoid of political tact. at’s where we Russians are so deﬁcient. e marshal of the province is
our opponent, and with him you’re ami coon, and you beg him to stand. Count
Vronsky, now … I’m not making a friend of him; he’s asked me to dinner, and I’m
not going; but he’s one of our side—why make an enemy of him? en you ask
Nevyedovsky if he’s going to stand. at’s not a thing to do."
"Oh, I don’t understand it at all! And it’s all such nonsense," Levin answered
gloomily.
"You say it’s all such nonsense, but as soon as you have anything to do with
it, you make a muddle."
Levin did not answer, and they walked together into the big room.
e marshal of the province, though he was vaguely conscious in the air
of some trap being prepared for him, and though he had not been called upon
by all to stand, had still made up his mind to stand. All was silence in the room.
e secretary announced in a loud voice that the captain of the guards, Mihail
Stepanovitch Snetkov, would now be balloted for as marshal of the province.
e district marshals walked carrying plates, on which were balls, from their
tables to the high table, and the election began.

dxciii
"Put it in the right side," whispered Stepan Arkadyevitch, as with his brother
Levin followed the marshal of his district to the table. But Levin had forgoen
by now the calculations that had been explained to him, and was afraid Stepan
Arkadyevitch might be mistaken in saying "the right side." Surely Snetkov was
the enemy. As he went up, he held the ball in his right hand, but thinking he was
wrong, just at the box he changed to the le hand, and undoubtedly put the ball
to the le. An adept in the business, standing at the box and seeing by the mere
action of the elbow where each put his ball, scowled with annoyance. It was no
good for him to use his insight.
Everything was still, and the counting of the balls was heard. en a single
voice rose and proclaimed the numbers for and against. e marshal had been
voted for by a considerable majority. All was noise and eager movement towards
the doors. Snetkov came in, and the nobles thronged round him, congratulating
him.
"Well, now is it over?" Levin asked Sergey Ivanovitch.
"It’s only just beginning," Sviazhsky said, replying for Sergey Ivanovitch
with a smile. "Some other candidate may receive more votes than the marshal."
Levin had quite forgoen about that. Now he could only remember that
there was some sort of trickery in it, but he was too bored to think what it was
exactly. He felt depressed, and longed to get out of the crowd.
As no one was paying any aention to him, and no one apparently needed
him, he quietly slipped away into the lile room where the refreshments were, and
again had a great sense of comfort when he saw the waiters. e lile old waiter
pressed him to have something, and Levin agreed. Aer eating a cutlet with beans
and talking to the waiters of their former masters, Levin, not wishing to go back
to the hall, where it was all so distasteful to him, proceeded to walk through the
galleries. e galleries were full of fashionably dressed ladies, leaning over the
balustrade and trying not to lose a single word of what was being said below.
With the ladies were siing and standing smart lawyers, high school teachers
in spectacles, and oﬃcers. Everywhere they were talking of the election, and of
how worried the marshal was, and how splendid the discussions had been. In one
group Levin heard his brother’s praises. One lady was telling a lawyer:
"How glad I am I heard Koznishev! It’s worth losing one’s dinner. He’s
exquisite! So clear and distinct all of it! ere’s not one of you in the law courts
that speaks like that. e only one is Meidel, and he’s not so eloquent by a long
way."
Finding a free place, Levin leaned over the balustrade and began looking
and listening.
All the noblemen were siing railed oﬀ behind barriers according to their
districts. In the middle of the room stood a man in a uniform, who shouted in a

dxciv
loud, high voice:
"As a candidate for the marshalship of the nobility of the province we call
upon staﬀ-captain Yevgeney Ivanovitch Apuhtin!" A dead silence followed, and
then a weak old voice was heard: "Declined!"
"We call upon the privy councilor Pyotr Petrovitch Bol," the voice began
again.
"Declined!" a high boyish voice replied.
Again it began, and again "Declined." And so it went on for about an hour.
Levin, with his elbows on the balustrade, looked and listened. At ﬁrst he wondered and wanted to know what it meant; then feeling sure that he could not make
it out he began to be bored. en recalling all the excitement and vindictiveness
he had seen on all the faces, he felt sad; he made up his mind to go, and went
downstairs. As he passed through the entry to the galleries he met a dejected
high school boy walking up and down with tired-looking eyes. On the stairs he
met a couple—a lady running quickly on her high heels and the jaunty deputy
prosecutor.
"I told you you weren’t late," the deputy prosecutor was saying at the moment when Levin moved aside to let the lady pass.
Levin was on the stairs to the way out, and was just feeling in his waistcoat
pocket for the number of his overcoat, when the secretary overtook him.
"is way, please, Konstantin Dmitrievitch; they are voting."
e candidate who was being voted on was Nevyedovsky, who had so
stoutly denied all idea of standing. Levin went up to the door of the room; it
was locked. e secretary knocked, the door opened, and Levin was met by two
red-faced gentlemen, who darted out.
"I can’t stand any more of it," said one red-faced gentleman.
Aer them the face of the marshal of the province was poked out. His face
was dreadful-looking from exhaustion and dismay.
"I told you not to let any one out!" he cried to the doorkeeper.
"I let someone in, your excellency!"
"Mercy on us!" and with a heavy sigh the marshal of the province walked
with downcast head to the high table in the middle of the room, his legs staggering
in his white trousers.
Nevyedovsky had scored a higher majority, as they had planned, and he
was the new marshal of the province. Many people were amused, many were
pleased and happy, many were in ecstasies, many were disgusted and unhappy.
e former marshal of the province was in a state of despair, which he could not
conceal. When Nevyedovsky went out of the room, the crowd thronged round
him and followed him enthusiastically, just as they had followed the governor
who had opened the meetings, and just as they had followed Snetkov when he

dxcv
was elected.

Chapter 
e newly elected marshal and many of the successful party dined that day with
Vronsky.
Vronsky had come to the elections partly because he was bored in the country and wanted to show Anna his right to independence, and also to repay Sviazhsky by his support at the election for all the trouble he had taken for Vronsky
at the district council election, but chieﬂy in order strictly to perform all those
duties of a nobleman and landowner which he had taken upon himself. But he
had not in the least expected that the election would so interest him, so keenly
excite him, and that he would be so good at this kind of thing. He was quite a new
man in the circle of the nobility of the province, but his success was unmistakable, and he was not wrong in supposing that he had already obtained a certain
inﬂuence. is inﬂuence was due to his wealth and reputation, the capital house
in the town lent him by his old friend Shirkov, who had a post in the department
of ﬁnances and was director of a ﬂourishing bank in Kashin; the excellent cook
Vronsky had brought from the country, and his friendship with the governor, who
was a schoolfellow of Vronsky’s—a schoolfellow he had patronized and protected
indeed. But what contributed more than all to his success was his direct, equable
manner with everyone, which very quickly made the majority of the noblemen
reverse the current opinion of his supposed haughtiness. He was himself conscious that, except that whimsical gentleman married to Kiy Shtcherbatskaya,
who had à propos de boes poured out a stream of irrelevant absurdities with such
spiteful fury, every nobleman with whom he had made acquaintance had become
his adherent. He saw clearly, and other people recognized it, too, that he had
done a great deal to secure the success of Nevyedovsky. And now at his own table, celebrating Nevyedovsky’s election, he was experiencing an agreeable sense
of triumph over the success of his candidate. e election itself had so fascinated
him that, if he could succeed in geing married during the next three years, he began to think of standing himself—much as aer winning a race ridden by a jockey,
he had longed to ride a race himself.
Today he was celebrating the success of his jockey. Vronsky sat at the head
of the table, on his right hand sat the young governor, a general of high rank.
To all the rest he was the chief man in the province, who had solemnly opened
the elections with his speech, and aroused a feeling of respect and even of awe
in many people, as Vronsky saw; to Vronsky he was lile Katka Maslov—that
had been his nickname in the Pages’ Corps—whom he felt to be shy and tried to

dxcvi
mere à son aise. On the le hand sat Nevyedovsky with his youthful, stubborn,
and malignant face. With him Vronsky was simple and deferential.
Sviazhsky took his failure very light-heartedly. It was indeed no failure in
his eyes, as he said himself, turning, glass in hand, to Nevyedovsky; they could
not have found a beer representative of the new movement, which the nobility
ought to follow. And so every honest person, as he said, was on the side of today’s
success and was rejoicing over it.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was glad, too, that he was having a good time, and that
everyone was pleased. e episode of the elections served as a good occasion for a
capital dinner. Sviazhsky comically imitated the tearful discourse of the marshal,
and observed, addressing Nevyedovsky, that his excellency would have to select
another more complicated method of auditing the accounts than tears. Another
nobleman jocosely described how footmen in stockings had been ordered for the
marshal’s ball, and how now they would have to be sent back unless the new
marshal would give a ball with footmen in stockings.
Continually during dinner they said of Nevyedovsky: "our marshal," and
"your excellency."
is was said with the same pleasure with which a bride is called "Madame"
and her husband’s name. Nevyedovsky aﬀected to be not merely indiﬀerent but
scornful of this appellation, but it was obvious that he was highly delighted, and
had to keep a curb on himself not to betray the triumph which was unsuitable to
their new liberal tone.
Aer dinner several telegrams were sent to people interested in the result
of the election. And Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was in high good humor, sent
Darya Alexandrovna a telegram: "Nevyedovsky elected by twenty votes. Congratulations. Tell people." He dictated it aloud, saying: "We must let them share
our rejoicing." Darya Alexandrovna, geing the message, simply sighed over the
rouble wasted on it, and understood that it was an aer-dinner aﬀair. She knew
Stiva had a weakness aer dining for faire jouer le télégraphe.
Everything, together with the excellent dinner and the wine, not from Russian merchants, but imported direct from abroad, was extremely digniﬁed, simple,
and enjoyable. e party—some twenty—had been selected by Sviazhsky from
among the more active new liberals, all of the same way of thinking, who were
at the same time clever and well bred. ey drank, also half in jest, to the health
of the new marshal of the province, of the governor, of the bank director, and of
"our amiable host."
Vronsky was satisﬁed. He had never expected to ﬁnd so pleasant a tone in
the provinces.
Towards the end of dinner it was still more lively. e governor asked Vronsky to come to a concert for the beneﬁt of the Servians which his wife, who was

dxcvii
anxious to make his acquaintance, had been geing up.
"ere’ll be a ball, and you’ll see the belle of the province. Worth seeing,
really."
"Not in my line," Vronsky answered. He liked that English phrase. But he
smiled, and promised to come.
Before they rose from the table, when all of them were smoking, Vronsky’s
valet went up to him with a leer on a tray.
"From Vozdvizhenskoe by special messenger," he said with a signiﬁcant expression.
"Astonishing! how like he is to the deputy prosecutor Sventitsky," said one
of the guests in French of the valet, while Vronsky, frowning, read the leer.
e leer was from Anna. Before he read the leer, he knew its contents.
Expecting the elections to be over in ﬁve days, he had promised to be back on
Friday. Today was Saturday, and he knew that the leer contained reproaches for
not being back at the time ﬁxed. e leer he had sent the previous evening had
probably not reached her yet.
e leer was what he had expected, but the form of it was unexpected,
and particularly disagreeable to him. "Annie is very ill, the doctor says it may
be inﬂammation. I am losing my head all alone. Princess Varvara is no help, but
a hindrance. I expected you the day before yesterday, and yesterday, and now I
am sending to ﬁnd out where you are and what you are doing. I wanted to come
myself, but thought beer of it, knowing you would dislike it. Send some answer,
that I may know what to do."
e child ill, yet she had thought of coming herself. eir daughter ill, and
this hostile tone.
e innocent festivities over the election, and this gloomy, burdensome love
to which he had to return struck Vronsky by their contrast. But he had to go, and
by the ﬁrst train that night he set oﬀ home.

Chapter 
Before Vronsky’s departure for the elections, Anna had reﬂected that the scenes
constantly repeated between them each time he le home, might only make him
cold to her instead of aaching him to her, and resolved to do all she could to
control herself so as to bear the parting with composure. But the cold, severe
glance with which he had looked at her when he came to tell her he was going
had wounded her, and before he had started her peace of mind was destroyed.
In solitude aerwards, thinking over that glance which had expressed his
right to freedom, she came, as she always did, to the same point—the sense of her

dxcviii
own humiliation. "He has the right to go away when and where he chooses. Not
simply to go away, but to leave me. He has every right, and I have none. But
knowing that, he ought not to do it. What has he done, though?… He looked
at me with a cold, severe expression. Of course that is something indeﬁnable,
impalpable, but it has never been so before, and that glance means a great deal,"
she thought. "at glance shows the beginning of indiﬀerence."
And though she felt sure that a coldness was beginning, there was nothing
she could do, she could not in any way alter her relations to him. Just as before,
only by love and by charm could she keep him. And so, just as before, only by
occupation in the day, by morphine at night, could she stiﬂe the fearful thought
of what would be if he ceased to love her. It is true there was still one means; not
to keep him—for that she wanted nothing more than his love—but to be nearer to
him, to be in such a position that he would not leave her. at means was divorce
and marriage. And she began to long for that, and made up her mind to agree to
it the ﬁrst time he or Stiva approached her on the subject.
Absorbed in such thoughts, she passed ﬁve days without him, the ﬁve days
that he was to be at the elections.
Walks, conversation with Princess Varvara, visits to the hospital, and, most
of all, reading—reading of one book aer another—ﬁlled up her time. But on the
sixth day, when the coachman came back without him, she felt that now she was
uerly incapable of stiﬂing the thought of him and of what he was doing there,
just at that time her lile girl was taken ill. Anna began to look aer her, but even
that did not distract her mind, especially as the illness was not serious. However
hard she tried, she could not love this lile child, and to feign love was beyond her
powers. Towards the evening of that day, still alone, Anna was in such a panic
about him that she decided to start for the town, but on second thoughts wrote him
the contradictory leer that Vronsky received, and without reading it through,
sent it oﬀ by a special messenger. e next morning she received his leer and
regreed her own. She dreaded a repetition of the severe look he had ﬂung at her
at parting, especially when he knew that the baby was not dangerously ill. But
still she was glad she had wrien to him. At this moment Anna was positively
admiing to herself that she was a burden to him, that he would relinquish his
freedom regretfully to return to her, and in spite of that she was glad he was
coming. Let him weary of her, but he would be here with her, so that she would
see him, would know of every action he took.
She was siing in the drawing room near a lamp, with a new volume of
Taine, and as she read, listening to the sound of the wind outside, and every
minute expecting the carriage to arrive. Several times she had fancied she heard
the sound of wheels, but she had been mistaken. At last she heard not the sound of
wheels, but the coachman’s shout and the dull rumble in the covered entry. Even

dxcix
Princess Varvara, playing patience, conﬁrmed this, and Anna, ﬂushing hotly, got
up; but instead of going down, as she had done twice before, she stood still. She
suddenly felt ashamed of her duplicity, but even more she dreaded how he might
meet her. All feeling of wounded pride had passed now; she was only afraid of the
expression of his displeasure. She remembered that her child had been perfectly
well again for the last two days. She felt positively vexed with her for geing
beer from the very moment her leer was sent oﬀ. en she thought of him,
that he was here, all of him, with his hands, his eyes. She heard his voice. And
forgeing everything, she ran joyfully to meet him.
"Well, how is Annie?" he said timidly from below, looking up to Anna as
she ran down to him.
He was siing on a chair, and a footman was pulling oﬀ his warm over-boot.
"Oh, she is beer."
"And you?" he said, shaking himself.
She took his hand in both of hers, and drew it to her waist, never taking her
eyes oﬀ him.
"Well, I’m glad," he said, coldly scanning her, her hair, her dress, which he
knew she had put on for him. All was charming, but how many times it had
charmed him! And the stern, stony expression that she so dreaded seled upon
his face.
"Well, I’m glad. And are you well?" he said, wiping his damp beard with his
handkerchief and kissing her hand.
"Never mind," she thought, "only let him be here, and so long as he’s here
he cannot, he dare not, cease to love me."
e evening was spent happily and gaily in the presence of Princess Varvara,
who complained to him that Anna had been taking morphine in his absence.
"What am I to do? I couldn’t sleep…. My thoughts prevented me. When
he’s here I never take it—hardly ever."
He told her about the election, and Anna knew how by adroit questions
to bring him to what gave him most pleasure—his own success. She told him of
everything that interested him at home; and all that she told him was of the most
cheerful description.
But late in the evening, when they were alone, Anna, seeing that she had
regained complete possession of him, wanted to erase the painful impression of
the glance he had given her for her leer. She said:
"Tell me frankly, you were vexed at geing my leer, and you didn’t believe
me?"
As soon as she had said it, she felt that however warm his feelings were to
her, he had not forgiven her for that.
"Yes," he said, "the leer was so strange. First, Annie ill, and then you

thought of coming yourself."
"It was all the truth."
"Oh, I don’t doubt it."
"Yes, you do doubt it. You are vexed, I see."
"Not for one moment. I’m only vexed, that’s true, that you seem somehow
unwilling to admit that there are duties…"
"e duty of going to a concert…"
"But we won’t talk about it," he said.
"Why not talk about it?" she said.
"I only meant to say that maers of real importance may turn up. Now, for
instance, I shall have to go to Moscow to arrange about the house…. Oh, Anna,
why are you so irritable? Don’t you know that I can’t live without you?"
"If so," said Anna, her voice suddenly changing, "it means that you are sick
of this life…. Yes, you will come for a day and go away, as men do…"
"Anna, that’s cruel. I am ready to give up my whole life."
But she did not hear him.
"If you go to Moscow, I will go too. I will not stay here. Either we must
separate or else live together."
"Why, you know, that’s my one desire. But for that…"
"We must get a divorce. I will write to him. I see I cannot go on like this….
But I will come with you to Moscow."
"You talk as if you were threatening me. But I desire nothing so much as
never to be parted from you," said Vronsky, smiling.
But as he said these words there gleamed in his eyes not merely a cold look,
but the vindictive look of a man persecuted and made cruel.
She saw the look and correctly divined its meaning.
"If so, it’s a calamity!" that glance told her. It was a moment’s impression,
but she never forgot it.
Anna wrote to her husband asking him about a divorce, and towards the end
of November, taking leave of Princess Varvara, who wanted to go to Petersburg,
she went with Vronsky to Moscow. Expecting every day an answer from Alexey
Alexandrovitch, and aer that the divorce, they now established themselves together like married people.

PART SEVEN

dci

Chapter 
e Levins had been three months in Moscow. e date had long passed on which,
according to the most trustworthy calculations of people learned in such maers,
Kiy should have been conﬁned. But she was still about, and there was nothing to
show that her time was any nearer than two months ago. e doctor, the monthly
nurse, and Dolly and her mother, and most of all Levin, who could not think of
the approaching event without terror, began to be impatient and uneasy. Kiy
was the only person who felt perfectly calm and happy.
She was distinctly conscious now of the birth of a new feeling of love for
the future child, for her to some extent actually existing already, and she brooded
blissfully over this feeling. He was not by now altogether a part of herself, but
sometimes lived his own life independently of her. Oen this separate being gave
her pain, but at the same time she wanted to laugh with a strange new joy.
All the people she loved were with her, and all were so good to her, so
aentively caring for her, so entirely pleasant was everything presented to her,
that if she had not known and felt that it must all soon be over, she could not have
wished for a beer and pleasanter life. e only thing that spoiled the charm of
this manner of life was that her husband was not here as she loved him to be, and
as he was in the country.
She liked his serene, friendly, and hospitable manner in the country. In the
town he seemed continually uneasy and on his guard, as though he were afraid
someone would be rude to him, and still more to her. At home in the country,
knowing himself distinctly to be in his right place, he was never in haste to be oﬀ
elsewhere. He was never unoccupied. Here in town he was in a continual hurry,
as though afraid of missing something, and yet he had nothing to do. And she felt
sorry for him. To others, she knew, he did not appear an object of pity. On the
contrary, when Kiy looked at him in society, as one sometimes looks at those
one loves, trying to see him as if he were a stranger, so as to catch the impression
he must make on others, she saw with a panic even of jealous fear that he was
far indeed from being a pitiable ﬁgure, that he was very aractive with his ﬁne
breeding, his rather old-fashioned, reserved courtesy with women, his powerful
ﬁgure, and striking, as she thought, and expressive face. But she saw him not
from without, but from within; she saw that here he was not himself; that was
the only way she could deﬁne his condition to herself. Sometimes she inwardly
reproached him for his inability to live in the town; sometimes she recognized
that it was really hard for him to order his life here so that he could be satisﬁed
with it.
What had he to do, indeed? He did not care for cards; he did not go to a
club. Spending the time with jovial gentlemen of Oblonsky’s type—she knew now

dcii
what that meant … it meant drinking and going somewhere aer drinking. She
could not think without horror of where men went on such occasions. Was he to
go into society? But she knew he could only ﬁnd satisfaction in that if he took
pleasure in the society of young women, and that she could not wish for. Should
he stay at home with her, her mother and her sisters? But much as she liked and
enjoyed their conversations forever on the same subjects—"Aline-Nadine," as the
old prince called the sisters’ talks—she knew it must bore him. What was there
le for him to do? To go on writing at his book he had indeed aempted, and
at ﬁrst he used to go to the library and make extracts and look up references for
his book. But, as he told her, the more he did nothing, the less time he had to
do anything. And besides, he complained that he had talked too much about his
book here, and that consequently all his ideas about it were muddled and had lost
their interest for him.
One advantage in this town life was that quarrels hardly ever happened between them here in town. Whether it was that their conditions were diﬀerent, or
that they had both become more careful and sensible in that respect, they had no
quarrels in Moscow from jealousy, which they had so dreaded when they moved
from the country.
One event, an event of great importance to both from that point of view,
did indeed happen—that was Kiy’s meeting with Vronsky.
e old Princess Marya Borissovna, Kiy’s godmother, who had always
been very fond of her, had insisted on seeing her. Kiy, though she did not go
into society at all on account of her condition, went with her father to see the
venerable old lady, and there met Vronsky.
e only thing Kiy could reproach herself for at this meeting was that at
the instant when she recognized in his civilian dress the features once so familiar
to her, her breath failed her, the blood rushed to her heart, and a vivid blush—she
felt it—overspread her face. But this lasted only a few seconds. Before her father,
who purposely began talking in a loud voice to Vronsky, had ﬁnished, she was
perfectly ready to look at Vronsky, to speak to him, if necessary, exactly as she
spoke to Princess Marya Borissovna, and more than that, to do so in such a way
that everything to the faintest intonation and smile would have been approved by
her husband, whose unseen presence she seemed to feel about her at that instant.
She said a few words to him, even smiled serenely at his joke about the
elections, which he called "our parliament." (She had to smile to show she saw the
joke.) But she turned away immediately to Princess Marya Borissovna, and did
not once glance at him till he got up to go; then she looked at him, but evidently
only because it would be uncivil not to look at a man when he is saying good-bye.
She was grateful to her father for saying nothing to her about their meeting
Vronsky, but she saw by his special warmth to her aer the visit during their

dciii
usual walk that he was pleased with her. She was pleased with herself. She had
not expected she would have had the power, while keeping somewhere in the
boom of her heart all the memories of her old feeling for Vronsky, not only to
seem but to be perfectly indiﬀerent and composed with him.
Levin ﬂushed a great deal more than she when she told him she had met
Vronsky at Princess Marya Borissovna’s. It was very hard for her to tell him
this, but still harder to go on speaking of the details of the meeting, as he did not
question her, but simply gazed at her with a frown.
"I am very sorry you weren’t there," she said. "Not that you weren’t in the
room … I couldn’t have been so natural in your presence … I am blushing now
much more, much, much more," she said, blushing till the tears came into her eyes.
"But that you couldn’t see through a crack."
e truthful eyes told Levin that she was satisﬁed with herself, and in spite
of her blushing he was quickly reassured and began questioning her, which was
all she wanted. When he had heard everything, even to the detail that for the
ﬁrst second she could not help ﬂushing, but that aerwards she was just as direct
and as much at her ease as with any chance acquaintance, Levin was quite happy
again and said he was glad of it, and would not now behave as stupidly as he had
done at the election, but would try the ﬁrst time he met Vronsky to be as friendly
as possible.
"It’s so wretched to feel that there’s a man almost an enemy whom it’s
painful to meet," said Levin. "I’m very, very glad."

Chapter 
"Go, please, go then and call on the Bols," Kiy said to her husband, when he came
in to see her at eleven o’clock before going out. "I know you are dining at the club;
papa put down your name. But what are you going to do in the morning?"
"I am only going to Katavasov," answered Levin.
"Why so early?"
"He promised to introduce me to Metrov. I wanted to talk to him about my
work. He’s a distinguished scientiﬁc man from Petersburg," said Levin.
"Yes; wasn’t it his article you were praising so? Well, and aer that?" said
Kiy.
"I shall go to the court, perhaps, about my sister’s business."
"And the concert?" she queried.
"I shan’t go there all alone."
"No? do go; there are going to be some new things…. at interested you
so. I should certainly go."

dciv
"Well, anyway, I shall come home before dinner," he said, looking at his
watch.
"Put on your frock coat, so that you can go straight to call on Countess Bola."
"But is it absolutely necessary?"
"Oh, absolutely! He has been to see us. Come, what is it? You go in, sit
down, talk for ﬁve minutes of the weather, get up and go away."
"Oh, you wouldn’t believe it! I’ve got so out of the way of all this that it
makes me feel positively ashamed. It’s such a horrible thing to do! A complete
outsider walks in, sits down, stays on with nothing to do, wastes their time and
worries himself, and walks away!"
Kiy laughed.
"Why, I suppose you used to pay calls before you were married, didn’t you?"
"Yes, I did, but I always felt ashamed, and now I’m so out of the way of it
that, by Jove! I’d sooner go two days running without my dinner than pay this
call! One’s so ashamed! I feel all the while that they’re annoyed, that they’re
saying, ‘What has he come for?’"
"No, they won’t. I’ll answer for that," said Kiy, looking into his face with
a laugh. She took his hand. "Well, good-bye…. Do go, please."
He was just going out aer kissing his wife’s hand, when she stopped him.
"Kostya, do you know I’ve only ﬁy roubles le?"
"Oh, all right, I’ll go to the bank and get some. How much?" he said, with
the expression of dissatisfaction she knew so well.
"No, wait a minute." She held his hand. "Let’s talk about it, it worries me.
I seem to spend nothing unnecessary, but money seems to ﬂy away simply. We
don’t manage well, somehow."
"Oh, it’s all right," he said with a lile cough, looking at her from under his
brows.
at cough she knew well. It was a sign of intense dissatisfaction, not with
her, but with himself. He certainly was displeased not at so much money being
spent, but at being reminded of what he, knowing something was unsatisfactory,
wanted to forget.
"I have told Sokolov to sell the wheat, and to borrow an advance on the mill.
We shall have money enough in any case."
"Yes, but I’m afraid that altogether…"
"Oh, it’s all right, all right," he repeated. "Well, good-bye, darling."
"No, I’m really sorry sometimes that I listened to mamma. How nice it
would have been in the country! As it is, I’m worrying you all, and we’re wasting
our money."
"Not at all, not at all. Not once since I’ve been married have I said that
things could have been beer than they are…."

dcv
"Truly?" she said, looking into his eyes.
He had said it without thinking, simply to console her. But when he glanced
at her and saw those sweet truthful eyes fastened questioningly on him, he repeated it with his whole heart. "I was positively forgeing her," he thought. And
he remembered what was before them, so soon to come.
"Will it be soon? How do you feel?" he whispered, taking her two hands.
"I have so oen thought so, that now I don’t think about it or know anything
about it."
"And you’re not frightened?"
She smiled contemptuously.
"Not the least lile bit," she said.
"Well, if anything happens, I shall be at Katavasov’s."
"No, nothing will happen, and don’t think about it. I’m going for a walk
on the boulevard with papa. We’re going to see Dolly. I shall expect you before
dinner. Oh, yes! Do you know that Dolly’s position is becoming uerly impossible? She’s in debt all round; she hasn’t a penny. We were talking yesterday with
mamma and Arseny" (this was her sister’s husband Lvov), "and we determined to
send you with him to talk to Stiva. It’s really unbearable. One can’t speak to papa
about it…. But if you and he…"
"Why, what can we do?" said Levin.
"You’ll be at Arseny’s, anyway; talk to him, he will tell what we decided."
"Oh, I agree to everything Arseny thinks beforehand. I’ll go and see him.
By the way, if I do go to the concert, I’ll go with Natalia. Well, good-bye."
On the steps Levin was stopped by his old servant Kouzma, who had been
with him before his marriage, and now looked aer their household in town.
"Beauty" (that was the le sha-horse brought up from the country) "has
been badly shod and is quite lame," he said. "What does your honor wish to be
done?"
During the ﬁrst part of their stay in Moscow, Levin had used his own horses
brought up from the country. He had tried to arrange this part of their expenses
in the best and cheapest way possible; but it appeared that their own horses came
dearer than hired horses, and they still hired too.
"Send for the veterinary, there may be a bruise."
"And for Katerina Alexandrovna?" asked Kouzma.
Levin was not by now struck as he had been at ﬁrst by the fact that to get
from one end of Moscow to the other he had to have two powerful horses put into
a heavy carriage, to take the carriage three miles through the snowy slush and to
keep it standing there four hours, paying ﬁve roubles every time.
Now it seemed quite natural.
"Hire a pair for our carriage from the jobmaster," said he.

dcvi
"Yes, sir."
And so, simply and easily, thanks to the facilities of town life, Levin seled
a question which, in the country, would have called for so much personal trouble and exertion, and going out onto the steps, he called a sledge, sat down, and
drove to Nikitsky. On the way he thought no more of money, but mused on the
introduction that awaited him to the Petersburg savant, a writer on sociology,
and what he would say to him about his book.
Only during the ﬁrst days of his stay in Moscow Levin had been struck by
the expenditure, strange to one living in the country, unproductive but inevitable,
that was expected of him on every side. But by now he had grown used to it. at
had happened to him in this maer which is said to happen to drunkards—the
ﬁrst glass sticks in the throat, the second ﬂies down like a hawk, but aer the
third they’re like tiny lile birds. When Levin had changed his ﬁrst hundredrouble note to pay for liveries for his footmen and hall-porter he could not help
reﬂecting that these liveries were of no use to anyone—but they were indubitably
necessary, to judge by the amazement of the princess and Kiy when he suggested
that they might do without liveries,—that these liveries would cost the wages of
two laborers for the summer, that is, would pay for about three hundred working days from Easter to Ash Wednesday, and each a day of hard work from early
morning to late evening—and that hundred-rouble note did stick in his throat. But
the next note, changed to pay for providing a dinner for their relations, that cost
twenty-eight roubles, though it did excite in Levin the reﬂection that twenty-eight
roubles meant nine measures of oats, which men would with groans and sweat
have reaped and bound and thrashed and winnowed and sied and sown,—this
next one he parted with more easily. And now the notes he changed no longer
aroused such reﬂections, and they ﬂew oﬀ like lile birds. Whether the labor devoted to obtaining the money corresponded to the pleasure given by what was
bought with it, was a consideration he had long ago dismissed. His business calculation that there was a certain price below which he could not sell certain grain
was forgoen too. e rye, for the price of which he had so long held out, had
been sold for ﬁy kopecks a measure cheaper than it had been fetching a month
ago. Even the consideration that with such an expenditure he could not go on living for a year without debt, that even had no force. Only one thing was essential:
to have money in the bank, without inquiring where it came from, so as to know
that one had the wherewithal to buy meat for tomorrow. And this condition had
hitherto been fulﬁlled; he had always had the money in the bank. But now the
money in the bank had gone, and he could not quite tell where to get the next
installment. And this it was which, at the moment when Kiy had mentioned
money, had disturbed him; but he had no time to think about it. He drove oﬀ,
thinking of Katavasov and the meeting with Metrov that was before him.

dcvii

Chapter 
Levin had on this visit to town seen a great deal of his old friend at the university, Professor Katavasov, whom he had not seen since his marriage. He liked in
Katavasov the clearness and simplicity of his conception of life. Levin thought
that the clearness of Katavasov’s conception of life was due to the poverty of his
nature; Katavasov thought that the disconnectedness of Levin’s ideas was due to
his lack of intellectual discipline; but Levin enjoyed Katavasov’s clearness, and
Katavasov enjoyed the abundance of Levin’s untrained ideas, and they liked to
meet and to discuss.
Levin had read Katavasov some parts of his book, and he had liked them. On
the previous day Katavasov had met Levin at a public lecture and told him that
the celebrated Metrov, whose article Levin had so much liked, was in Moscow,
that he had been much interested by what Katavasov had told him about Levin’s
work, and that he was coming to see him tomorrow at eleven, and would be very
glad to make Levin’s acquaintance.
"You’re positively a reformed character, I’m glad to see," said Katavasov,
meeting Levin in the lile drawing room. "I heard the bell and thought: Impossible that it can be he at the exact time!… Well, what do you say to the Montenegrins
now? ey’re a race of warriors."
"Why, what’s happened?" asked Levin.
Katavasov in a few words told him the last piece of news from the war, and
going into his study, introduced Levin to a short, thick-set man of pleasant appearance. is was Metrov. e conversation touched for a brief space on politics and
on how recent events were looked at in the higher spheres in Petersburg. Metrov
repeated a saying that had reached him through a most trustworthy source, reported as having been uered on this subject by the Tsar and one of the ministers.
Katavasov had heard also on excellent authority that the Tsar had said something
quite diﬀerent. Levin tried to imagine circumstances in which both sayings might
have been uered, and the conversation on that topic dropped.
"Yes, here he’s wrien almost a book on the natural conditions of the laborer
in relation to the land," said Katavasov; "I’m not a specialist, but I, as a natural science man, was pleased at his not taking mankind as something outside biological
laws; but, on the contrary, seeing his dependence on his surroundings, and in that
dependence seeking the laws of his development."
"at’s very interesting," said Metrov.
"What I began precisely was to write a book on agriculture; but studying
the chief instrument of agriculture, the laborer," said Levin, reddening, "I could
not help coming to quite unexpected results."
And Levin began carefully, as it were, feeling his ground, to expound his

dcviii
views. He knew Metrov had wrien an article against the generally accepted
theory of political economy, but to what extent he could reckon on his sympathy
with his own new views he did not know and could not guess from the clever and
serene face of the learned man.
"But in what do you see the special characteristics of the Russian laborer?"
said Metrov; "in his biological characteristics, so to speak, or in the condition in
which he is placed?"
Levin saw that there was an idea underlying this question with which he
did not agree. But he went on explaining his own idea that the Russian laborer
has a quite special view of the land, diﬀerent from that of other people; and to
support this proposition he made haste to add that in his opinion this aitude of
the Russian peasant was due to the consciousness of his vocation to people vast
unoccupied expanses in the East.
"One may easily be led into error in basing any conclusion on the general
vocation of a people," said Metrov, interrupting Levin. "e condition of the laborer will always depend on his relation to the land and to capital."
And without leing Levin ﬁnish explaining his idea, Metrov began expounding to him the special point of his own theory.
In what the point of his theory lay, Levin did not understand, because he
did not take the trouble to understand. He saw that Metrov, like other people, in
spite of his own article, in which he had aacked the current theory of political
economy, looked at the position of the Russian peasant simply from the point of
view of capital, wages, and rent. He would indeed have been obliged to admit that
in the eastern—much the larger—part of Russia rent was as yet nil, that for ninetenths of the eighty millions of the Russian peasants wages took the form simply
of food provided for themselves, and that capital does not so far exist except in the
form of the most primitive tools. Yet it was only from that point of view that he
considered every laborer, though in many points he diﬀered from the economists
and had his own theory of the wage-fund, which he expounded to Levin.
Levin listened reluctantly, and at ﬁrst made objections. He would have liked
to interrupt Metrov, to explain his own thought, which in his opinion would have
rendered further exposition of Metrov’s theories superﬂuous. But later on, feeling
convinced that they looked at the maer so diﬀerently, that they could never understand one another, he did not even oppose his statements, but simply listened.
Although what Metrov was saying was by now uerly devoid of interest for him,
he yet experienced a certain satisfaction in listening to him. It ﬂaered his vanity that such a learned man should explain his ideas to him so eagerly, with such
intensity and conﬁdence in Levin’s understanding of the subject, sometimes with
a mere hint referring him to a whole aspect of the subject. He put this down to
his own credit, unaware that Metrov, who had already discussed his theory over

dcix
and over again with all his intimate friends, talked of it with special eagerness to
every new person, and in general was eager to talk to anyone of any subject that
interested him, even if still obscure to himself.
"We are late though," said Katavasov, looking at his watch directly Metrov
had ﬁnished his discourse.
"Yes, there’s a meeting of the Society of Amateurs today in commemoration
of the jubilee of Svintitch," said Katavasov in answer to Levin’s inquiry. "Pyotr
Ivanovitch and I were going. I’ve promised to deliver an address on his labors in
zoology. Come along with us, it’s very interesting."
"Yes, and indeed it’s time to start," said Metrov. "Come with us, and from
there, if you care to, come to my place. I should very much like to hear your work."
"Oh, no! It’s no good yet, it’s unﬁnished. But I shall be very glad to go to
the meeting."
"I say, friends, have you heard? He has handed in the separate report,"
Katavasov called from the other room, where he was puing on his frock coat.
And a conversation sprang up upon the university question, which was a
very important event that winter in Moscow. ree old professors in the council had not accepted the opinion of the younger professors. e young ones had
registered a separate resolution. is, in the judgment of some people, was monstrous, in the judgment of others it was the simplest and most just thing to do,
and the professors were split up into two parties.
One party, to which Katavasov belonged, saw in the opposite party a
scoundrelly betrayal and treachery, while the opposite party saw in them childishness and lack of respect for the authorities. Levin, though he did not belong
to the university, had several times already during his stay in Moscow heard and
talked about this maer, and had his own opinion on the subject. He took part in
the conversation that was continued in the street, as they all three walked to the
buildings of the old university.
e meeting had already begun. Round the cloth-covered table, at which
Katavasov and Metrov seated themselves, there were some half-dozen persons,
and one of these was bending close over a manuscript, reading something aloud.
Levin sat down in one of the empty chairs that were standing round the table,
and in a whisper asked a student siing near what was being read. e student,
eyeing Levin with displeasure, said:
"Biography."
ough Levin was not interested in the biography, he could not help listening, and learned some new and interesting facts about the life of the distinguished
man of science.
When the reader had ﬁnished, the chairman thanked him and read some
verses of the poet Ment sent him on the jubilee, and said a few words by way of

dcx
thanks to the poet. en Katavasov in his loud, ringing voice read his address on
the scientiﬁc labors of the man whose jubilee was being kept.
When Katavasov had ﬁnished, Levin looked at his watch, saw it was past
one, and thought that there would not be time before the concert to read Metrov
his book, and indeed, he did not now care to do so. During the reading he had
thought over their conversation. He saw distinctly now that though Metrov’s
ideas might perhaps have value, his own ideas had a value too, and their ideas
could only be made clear and lead to something if each worked separately in his
chosen path, and that nothing would be gained by puing their ideas together.
And having made up his mind to refuse Metrov’s invitation, Levin went up to
him at the end of the meeting. Metrov introduced Levin to the chairman, with
whom he was talking of the political news. Metrov told the chairman what he
had already told Levin, and Levin made the same remarks on his news that he
had already made that morning, but for the sake of variety he expressed also a
new opinion which had only just struck him. Aer that the conversation turned
again on the university question. As Levin had already heard it all, he made haste
to tell Metrov that he was sorry he could not take advantage of his invitation, took
leave, and drove to Lvov’s.

Chapter 
Lvov, the husband of Natalia, Kiy’s sister, had spent all his life in foreign capitals,
where he had been educated, and had been in the diplomatic service.
During the previous year he had le the diplomatic service, not owing to
any "unpleasantness" (he never had any "unpleasantness" with anyone), and was
transferred to the department of the court of the palace in Moscow, in order to
give his two boys the best education possible.
In spite of the striking contrast in their habits and views and the fact that
Lvov was older than Levin, they had seen a great deal of one another that winter,
and had taken a great liking to each other.
Lvov was at home, and Levin went in to him unannounced.
Lvov, in a house coat with a belt and in chamois leather shoes, was siing
in an armchair, and with a pince-nez with blue glasses he was reading a book
that stood on a reading desk, while in his beautiful hand he held a half-burned
cigaree daintily away from him.
His handsome, delicate, and still youthful-looking face, to which his curly,
glistening silvery hair gave a still more aristocratic air, lighted up with a smile
when he saw Levin.
"Capital! I was meaning to send to you. How’s Kiy? Sit here, it’s more

dcxi
comfortable." He got up and pushed up a rocking chair. "Have you read the last
circular in the Journal de St. Petersbourg? I think it’s excellent," he said, with a
slight French accent.
Levin told him what he had heard from Katavasov was being said in Petersburg, and aer talking a lile about politics, he told him of his interview with
Metrov, and the learned society’s meeting. To Lvov it was very interesting.
"at’s what I envy you, that you are able to mix in these interesting scientiﬁc circles," he said. And as he talked, he passed as usual into French, which was
easier to him. "It’s true I haven’t the time for it. My oﬃcial work and the children
leave me no time; and then I’m not ashamed to own that my education has been
too defective."
"at I don’t believe," said Levin with a smile, feeling, as he always did,
touched at Lvov’s low opinion of himself, which was not in the least put on from
a desire to seem or to be modest, but was absolutely sincere.
"Oh, yes, indeed! I feel now how badly educated I am. To educate my
children I positively have to look up a great deal, and in fact simply to study
myself. For it’s not enough to have teachers, there must be someone to look
aer them, just as on your land you want laborers and an overseer. See what I’m
reading"—he pointed to Buslaev’s Grammar on the desk—"it’s expected of Misha,
and it’s so diﬃcult…. Come, explain to me…. Here he says…"
Levin tried to explain to him that it couldn’t be understood, but that it had
to be taught; but Lvov would not agree with him.
"Oh, you’re laughing at it!"
"On the contrary, you can’t imagine how, when I look at you, I’m always
learning the task that lies before me, that is the education of one’s children."
"Well, there’s nothing for you to learn," said Lvov.
"All I know," said Levin, "is that I have never seen beer brought-up children
than yours, and I wouldn’t wish for children beer than yours."
Lvov visibly tried to restrain the expression of his delight, but he was positively radiant with smiles.
"If only they’re beer than I! at’s all I desire. You don’t know yet all the
work," he said, "with boys who’ve been le like mine to run wild abroad."
"You’ll catch all that up. ey’re such clever children. e great thing is the
education of character. at’s what I learn when I look at your children."
"You talk of the education of character. You can’t imagine how diﬃcult that
is! You have hardly succeeded in combating one tendency when others crop up,
and the struggle begins again. If one had not a support in religion—you remember we talked about that—no father could bring children up relying on his own
strength alone without that help."
is subject, which always interested Levin, was cut short by the entrance

dcxii
of the beauty Natalia Alexandrovna, dressed to go out.
"I didn’t know you were here," she said, unmistakably feeling no regret, but
a positive pleasure, in interrupting this conversation on a topic she had heard so
much of that she was by now weary of it. "Well, how is Kiy? I am dining with
you today. I tell you what, Arseny," she turned to her husband, "you take the
carriage."
And the husband and wife began to discuss their arrangements for the day.
As the husband had to drive to meet someone on oﬃcial business, while the wife
had to go to the concert and some public meeting of a commiee on the Eastern
estion, there was a great deal to consider and sele. Levin had to take part in
their plans as one of themselves. It was seled that Levin should go with Natalia
to the concert and the meeting, and that from there they should send the carriage
to the oﬃce for Arseny, and he should call for her and take her to Kiy’s; or that,
if he had not ﬁnished his work, he should send the carriage back and Levin would
go with her.
"He’s spoiling me," Lvov said to his wife; "he assures me that our children
are splendid, when I know how much that’s bad there is in them."
"Arseny goes to extremes, I always say," said his wife. "If you look for perfection, you will never be satisﬁed. And it’s true, as papa says,—that when we
were brought up there was one extreme—we were kept in the basement, while
our parents lived in the best rooms; now it’s just the other way—the parents are
in the wash house, while the children are in the best rooms. Parents now are not
expected to live at all, but to exist altogether for their children."
"Well, what if they like it beer?" Lvov said, with his beautiful smile, touching her hand. "Anyone who didn’t know you would think you were a stepmother,
not a true mother."
"No, extremes are not good in anything," Natalia said serenely, puing his
paper knife straight in its proper place on the table.
"Well, come here, you perfect children," Lvov said to the two handsome
boys who came in, and aer bowing to Levin, went up to their father, obviously
wishing to ask him about something.
Levin would have liked to talk to them, to hear what they would say to their
father, but Natalia began talking to him, and then Lvov’s colleague in the service,
Mahotin, walked in, wearing his court uniform, to go with him to meet someone, and a conversation was kept up without a break upon Herzegovina, Princess
Korzinskaya, the town council, and the sudden death of Madame Apraksina.
Levin even forgot the commission intrusted to him. He recollected it as he
was going into the hall.
"Oh, Kiy told me to talk to you about Oblonsky," he said, as Lvov was
standing on the stairs, seeing his wife and Levin oﬀ.

dcxiii
"Yes, yes, maman wants us, les beaux-frères, to aack him," he said, blushing.
"But why should I?"
"Well, then, I will aack him," said Madame Lvova, with a smile, standing
in her white sheepskin cape, waiting till they had ﬁnished speaking. "Come, let
us go."

Chapter 
At the concert in the aernoon two very interesting things were performed. One
was a fantasia, King Lear; the other was a quartee dedicated to the memory of
Bach. Both were new and in the new style, and Levin was eager to form an opinion
of them. Aer escorting his sister-in-law to her stall, he stood against a column
and tried to listen as aentively and conscientiously as possible. He tried not to
let his aention be distracted, and not to spoil his impression by looking at the
conductor in a white tie, waving his arms, which always disturbed his enjoyment
of music so much, or the ladies in bonnets, with strings carefully tied over their
ears, and all these people either thinking of nothing at all or thinking of all sorts
of things except the music. He tried to avoid meeting musical connoisseurs or
talkative acquaintances, and stood looking at the ﬂoor straight before him, listening.
But the more he listened to the fantasia of King Lear the further he felt from
forming any deﬁnite opinion of it. ere was, as it were, a continual beginning, a
preparation of the musical expression of some feeling, but it fell to pieces again directly, breaking into new musical motives, or simply nothing but the whims of the
composer, exceedingly complex but disconnected sounds. And these fragmentary
musical expressions, though sometimes beautiful, were disagreeable, because they
were uerly unexpected and not led up to by anything. Gaiety and grief and despair and tenderness and triumph followed one another without any connection,
like the emotions of a madman. And those emotions, like a madman’s, sprang up
quite unexpectedly.
During the whole of the performance Levin felt like a deaf man watching
people dancing, and was in a state of complete bewilderment when the fantasia
was over, and felt a great weariness from the fruitless strain on his aention.
Loud applause resounded on all sides. Everyone got up, moved about, and began
talking. Anxious to throw some light on his own perplexity from the impressions
of others, Levin began to walk about, looking for connoisseurs, and was glad to
see a well-known musical amateur in conversation with Pestsov, whom he knew.
"Marvelous!" Pestsov was saying in his mellow bass. "How are you, Konstantin Dmitrievitch? Particularly sculpturesque and plastic, so to say, and richly

dcxiv
colored is that passage where you feel Cordelia’s approach, where woman, das
ewig Weiblie, enters into conﬂict with fate. Isn’t it?"
"You mean … what has Cordelia to do with it?" Levin asked timidly, forgetting that the fantasia was supposed to represent King Lear.
"Cordelia comes in … see here!" said Pestsov, tapping his ﬁnger on the satiny
surface of the program he held in his hand and passing it to Levin.
Only then Levin recollected the title of the fantasia, and made haste to read
in the Russian translation the lines from Shakespeare that were printed on the
back of the program.
"You can’t follow it without that," said Pestsov, addressing Levin, as the person he had been speaking to had gone away, and he had no one to talk to.
In the entr’acte Levin and Pestsov fell into an argument upon the merits
and defects of music of the Wagner school. Levin maintained that the mistake of
Wagner and all his followers lay in their trying to take music into the sphere of
another art, just as poetry goes wrong when it tries to paint a face as the art of
painting ought to do, and as an instance of this mistake he cited the sculptor who
carved in marble certain poetic phantasms ﬂiing round the ﬁgure of the poet on
the pedestal. "ese phantoms were so far from being phantoms that they were
positively clinging on the ladder," said Levin. e comparison pleased him, but
he could not remember whether he had not used the same phrase before, and to
Pestsov, too, and as he said it he felt confused.
Pestsov maintained that art is one, and that it can aain its highest manifestations only by conjunction with all kinds of art.
e second piece that was performed Levin could not hear. Pestsov, who
was standing beside him, was talking to him almost all the time, condemning the
music for its excessive aﬀected assumption of simplicity, and comparing it with
the simplicity of the Pre-Raphaelites in painting. As he went out Levin met many
more acquaintances, with whom he talked of politics, of music, and of common
acquaintances. Among others he met Count Bol, whom he had uerly forgoen
to call upon.
"Well, go at once then," Madame Lvova said, when he told her; "perhaps
they’ll not be at home, and then you can come to the meeting to fetch me. You’ll
ﬁnd me still there."

Chapter 
"Perhaps they’re not at home?" said Levin, as he went into the hall of Countess
Bola’s house.
"At home; please walk in," said the porter, resolutely removing his overcoat.

dcxv
"How annoying!" thought Levin with a sigh, taking oﬀ one glove and
stroking his hat. "What did I come for? What have I to say to them?"
As he passed through the ﬁrst drawing room Levin met in the doorway
Countess Bola, giving some order to a servant with a care-worn and severe face.
On seeing Levin she smiled, and asked him to come into the lile drawing room,
where he heard voices. In this room there were siing in armchairs the two
daughters of the countess, and a Moscow colonel, whom Levin knew. Levin went
up, greeted them, and sat down beside the sofa with his hat on his knees.
"How is your wife? Have you been at the concert? We couldn’t go. Mamma
had to be at the funeral service."
"Yes, I heard…. What a sudden death!" said Levin.
e countess came in, sat down on the sofa, and she too asked aer his wife
and inquired about the concert.
Levin answered, and repeated an inquiry about Madame Apraksina’s sudden death.
"But she was always in weak health."
"Were you at the opera yesterday?"
"Yes, I was."
"Lucca was very good."
"Yes, very good," he said, and as it was uerly of no consequence to him
what they thought of him, he began repeating what they had heard a hundred
times about the characteristics of the singer’s talent. Countess Bola pretended to
be listening. en, when he had said enough and paused, the colonel, who had
been silent till then, began to talk. e colonel too talked of the opera, and about
culture. At last, aer speaking of the proposed folle journée at Turin’s, the colonel
laughed, got up noisily, and went away. Levin too rose, but he saw by the face
of the countess that it was not yet time for him to go. He must stay two minutes
longer. He sat down.
But as he was thinking all the while how stupid it was, he could not ﬁnd a
subject for conversation, and sat silent.
"You are not going to the public meeting? ey say it will be very interesting," began the countess.
"No, I promised my belle-soeur to fetch her from it," said Levin.
A silence followed. e mother once more exchanged glances with a daughter.
"Well, now I think the time has come," thought Levin, and he got up. e
ladies shook hands with him, and begged him to say mille oses to his wife for
them.
e porter asked him, as he gave him his coat, "Where is your honor staying?" and immediately wrote down his address in a big handsomely bound book.

dcxvi
"Of course I don’t care, but still I feel ashamed and awfully stupid," thought
Levin, consoling himself with the reﬂection that everyone does it. He drove to the
public meeting, where he was to ﬁnd his sister-in-law, so as to drive home with
her.
At the public meeting of the commiee there were a great many people, and
almost all the highest society. Levin was in time for the report which, as everyone
said, was very interesting. When the reading of the report was over, people moved
about, and Levin met Sviazhsky, who invited him very pressingly to come that
evening to a meeting of the Society of Agriculture, where a celebrated lecture was
to be delivered, and Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had only just come from the races,
and many other acquaintances; and Levin heard and uered various criticisms on
the meeting, on the new fantasia, and on a public trial. But, probably from the
mental fatigue he was beginning to feel, he made a blunder in speaking of the
trial, and this blunder he recalled several times with vexation. Speaking of the
sentence upon a foreigner who had been condemned in Russia, and of how unfair
it would be to punish him by exile abroad, Levin repeated what he had heard the
day before in conversation from an acquaintance.
"I think sending him abroad is much the same as punishing a carp by puing
it into the water," said Levin. en he recollected that this idea, which he had heard
from an acquaintance and uered as his own, came from a fable of Krilov’s, and
that the acquaintance had picked it up from a newspaper article.
Aer driving home with his sister-in-law, and ﬁnding Kiy in good spirits
and quite well, Levin drove to the club.

Chapter 
Levin reached the club just at the right time. Members and visitors were driving
up as he arrived. Levin had not been at the club for a very long while—not since
he lived in Moscow, when he was leaving the university and going into society.
He remembered the club, the external details of its arrangement, but he had completely forgoen the impression it had made on him in old days. But as soon as,
driving into the wide semicircular court and geing out of the sledge, he mounted
the steps, and the hall porter, adorned with a crossway scarf, noiselessly opened
the door to him with a bow; as soon as he saw in the porter’s room the cloaks and
galoshes of members who thought it less trouble to take them oﬀ downstairs; as
soon as he heard the mysterious ringing bell that preceded him as he ascended the
easy, carpeted staircase, and saw the statue on the landing, and the third porter at
the top doors, a familiar ﬁgure grown older, in the club livery, opening the door
without haste or delay, and scanning the visitors as they passed in—Levin felt the

dcxvii
old impression of the club come back in a rush, an impression of repose, comfort,
and propriety.
"Your hat, please," the porter said to Levin, who forgot the club rule to leave
his hat in the porter’s room. "Long time since you’ve been. e prince put your
name down yesterday. Prince Stepan Arkadyevitch is not here yet."
e porter did not only know Levin, but also all his ties and relationships,
and so immediately mentioned his intimate friends.
Passing through the outer hall, divided up by screens, and the room partitioned on the right, where a man sits at the fruit buﬀet, Levin overtook an old
man walking slowly in, and entered the dining room full of noise and people.
He walked along the tables, almost all full, and looked at the visitors. He saw
people of all sorts, old and young; some he knew a lile, some intimate friends.
ere was not a single cross or worried-looking face. All seemed to have le
their cares and anxieties in the porter’s room with their hats, and were all deliberately geing ready to enjoy the material blessings of life. Sviazhsky was here
and Shtcherbatsky, Nevyedovsky and the old prince, and Vronsky and Sergey
Ivanovitch.
"Ah! why are you late?" the prince said smiling, and giving him his hand
over his own shoulder. "How’s Kiy?" he added, smoothing out the napkin he
had tucked in at his waistcoat buons.
"All right; they are dining at home, all the three of them."
"Ah, ‘Aline-Nadine,’ to be sure! ere’s no room with us. Go to that table,
and make haste and take a seat," said the prince, and turning away he carefully
took a plate of eel soup.
"Levin, this way!" a good-natured voice shouted a lile farther on. It was
Turovtsin. He was siing with a young oﬃcer, and beside them were two chairs
turned upside down. Levin gladly went up to them. He had always liked the
good-hearted rake, Turovtsin—he was associated in his mind with memories of
his courtship—and at that moment, aer the strain of intellectual conversation,
the sight of Turovtsin’s good-natured face was particularly welcome.
"For you and Oblonsky. He’ll be here directly."
e young man, holding himself very erect, with eyes forever twinkling
with enjoyment, was an oﬃcer from Petersburg, Gagin. Turovtsin introduced
them.
"Oblonsky’s always late."
"Ah, here he is!"
"Have you only just come?" said Oblonsky, coming quickly towards them.
"Good day. Had some vodka? Well, come along then."
Levin got up and went with him to the big table spread with spirits and
appetizers of the most various kinds. One would have thought that out of two

dcxviii
dozen delicacies one might ﬁnd something to one’s taste, but Stepan Arkadyevitch asked for something special, and one of the liveried waiters standing by immediately brought what was required. ey drank a wine glassful and returned
to their table.
At once, while they were still at the soup, Gagin was served with champagne, and told the waiter to ﬁll four glasses. Levin did not refuse the wine, and
asked for a second bole. He was very hungry, and ate and drank with great
enjoyment, and with still greater enjoyment took part in the lively and simple
conversation of his companions. Gagin, dropping his voice, told the last good
story from Petersburg, and the story, though improper and stupid, was so ludicrous that Levin broke into roars of laughter so loud that those near looked round.
"at’s in the same style as, ‘that’s a thing I can’t endure!’ You know the
story?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Ah, that’s exquisite! Another bole," he said
to the waiter, and he began to relate his good story.
"Pyotr Illyitch Vinovsky invites you to drink with him," a lile old waiter interrupted Stepan Arkadyevitch, bringing two delicate glasses of sparkling champagne, and addressing Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin. Stepan Arkadyevitch took
the glass, and looking towards a bald man with red mustaches at the other end of
the table, he nodded to him, smiling.
"Who’s that?" asked Levin.
"You met him once at my place, don’t you remember? A good-natured fellow."
Levin did the same as Stepan Arkadyevitch and took the glass.
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s anecdote too was very amusing. Levin told his story,
and that too was successful. en they talked of horses, of the races, of what they
had been doing that day, and of how smartly Vronsky’s Atlas had won the ﬁrst
prize. Levin did not notice how the time passed at dinner.
"Ah! and here they are!" Stepan Arkadyevitch said towards the end of dinner, leaning over the back of his chair and holding out his hand to Vronsky, who
came up with a tall oﬃcer of the Guards. Vronsky’s face too beamed with the look
of good-humored enjoyment that was general in the club. He propped his elbow
playfully on Stepan Arkadyevitch’s shoulder, whispering something to him, and
he held out his hand to Levin with the same good-humored smile.
"Very glad to meet you," he said. "I looked out for you at the election, but I
was told you had gone away."
"Yes, I le the same day. We’ve just been talking of your horse. I congratulate you," said Levin. "It was very rapidly run."
"Yes; you’ve race horses too, haven’t you?"
"No, my father had; but I remember and know something about it."
"Where have you dined?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.

dcxix
"We were at the second table, behind the columns."
"We’ve been celebrating his success," said the tall colonel. "It’s his second
Imperial prize. I wish I might have the luck at cards he has with horses. Well, why
waste the precious time? I’m going to the ‘infernal regions,’" added the colonel,
and he walked away.
"at’s Yashvin," Vronsky said in answer to Turovtsin, and he sat down in
the vacated seat beside them. He drank the glass oﬀered him, and ordered a bole
of wine. Under the inﬂuence of the club atmosphere or the wine he had drunk,
Levin chaed away to Vronsky of the best breeds of cale, and was very glad
not to feel the slightest hostility to this man. He even told him, among other
things, that he had heard from his wife that she had met him at Princess Marya
Borissovna’s.
"Ah, Princess Marya Borissovna, she’s exquisite!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
and he told an anecdote about her which set them all laughing. Vronsky particularly laughed with such simplehearted amusement that Levin felt quite reconciled
to him.
"Well, have we ﬁnished?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, geing up with a smile.
"Let us go."

Chapter 
Geing up from the table, Levin walked with Gagin through the loy room to the
billiard room, feeling his arms swing as he walked with a peculiar lightness and
ease. As he crossed the big room, he came upon his father-in-law.
"Well, how do you like our Temple of Indolence?" said the prince, taking his
arm. "Come along, come along!"
"Yes, I wanted to walk about and look at everything. It’s interesting."
"Yes, it’s interesting for you. But its interest for me is quite diﬀerent. You
look at those lile old men now," he said, pointing to a club member with bent
back and projecting lip, shuﬄing towards them in his so boots, "and imagine
that they were shlupiks like that from their birth up."
"How shlupiks?"
"I see you don’t know that name. at’s our club designation. You know
the game of rolling eggs: when one’s rolled a long while it becomes a shlupik. So
it is with us; one goes on coming and coming to the club, and ends by becoming
a shlupik. Ah, you laugh! but we look out, for fear of dropping into it ourselves.
You know Prince Tchetchensky?" inquired the prince; and Levin saw by his face
that he was just going to relate something funny.
"No, I don’t know him."

dcxx
"You don’t say so! Well, Prince Tchetchensky is a well-known ﬁgure. No
maer, though. He’s always playing billiards here. Only three years ago he was
not a shlupik and kept up his spirits and even used to call other people shlupiks.
But one day he turns up, and our porter … you know Vassily? Why, that fat
one; he’s famous for his bon mots. And so Prince Tchetchensky asks him, ‘Come,
Vassily, who’s here? Any shlupiks here yet?’ And he says, ‘You’re the third.’ Yes,
my dear boy, that he did!"
Talking and greeting the friends they met, Levin and the prince walked
through all the rooms: the great room where tables had already been set, and
the usual partners were playing for small stakes; the divan room, where they were
playing chess, and Sergey Ivanovitch was siing talking to somebody; the billiard
room, where, about a sofa in a recess, there was a lively party drinking champagne—Gagin was one of them. ey peeped into the "infernal regions," where
a good many men were crowding round one table, at which Yashvin was siing.
Trying not to make a noise, they walked into the dark reading room, where under
the shaded lamps there sat a young man with a wrathful countenance, turning
over one journal aer another, and a bald general buried in a book. ey went,
too, into what the prince called the intellectual room, where three gentlemen were
engaged in a heated discussion of the latest political news.
"Prince, please come, we’re ready," said one of his card party, who had come
to look for him, and the prince went oﬀ. Levin sat down and listened, but recalling
all the conversation of the morning he felt all of a sudden fearfully bored. He got
up hurriedly, and went to look for Oblonsky and Turovtsin, with whom it had
been so pleasant.
Turovtsin was one of the circle drinking in the billiard room, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch was talking with Vronsky near the door at the farther corner of the
room.
"It’s not that she’s dull; but this undeﬁned, this unseled position," Levin
caught, and he was hurrying away, but Stepan Arkadyevitch called to him.
"Levin," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and Levin noticed that his eyes were not
full of tears exactly, but moist, which always happened when he had been drinking, or when he was touched. Just now it was due to both causes. "Levin, don’t
go," he said, and he warmly squeezed his arm above the elbow, obviously not at
all wishing to let him go.
"is is a true friend of mine—almost my greatest friend," he said to Vronsky.
"You have become even closer and dearer to me. And I want you, and I know you
ought, to be friends, and great friends, because you’re both splendid fellows."
"Well, there’s nothing for us now but to kiss and be friends," Vronsky said,
with good-natured playfulness, holding out his hand.
Levin quickly took the oﬀered hand, and pressed it warmly.

dcxxi
"I’m very, very glad," said Levin.
"Waiter, a bole of champagne," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"And I’m very glad," said Vronsky.
But in spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s desire, and their own desire, they had
nothing to talk about, and both felt it.
"Do you know, he has never met Anna?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to Vronsky. "And I want above everything to take him to see her. Let us go, Levin!"
"Really?" said Vronsky. "She will be very glad to see you. I should be going
home at once," he added, "but I’m worried about Yashvin, and I want to stay on
till he ﬁnishes."
"Why, is he losing?"
"He keeps losing, and I’m the only friend that can restrain him."
"Well, what do you say to pyramids? Levin, will you play? Capital!" said
Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Get the table ready," he said to the marker.
"It has been ready a long while," answered the marker, who had already set
the balls in a triangle, and was knocking the red one about for his own diversion.
"Well, let us begin."
Aer the game Vronsky and Levin sat down at Gagin’s table, and at Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s suggestion Levin took a hand in the game.
Vronsky sat down at the table, surrounded by friends, who were incessantly
coming up to him. Every now and then he went to the "infernal" to keep an eye on
Yashvin. Levin was enjoying a delightful sense of repose aer the mental fatigue
of the morning. He was glad that all hostility was at an end with Vronsky, and
the sense of peace, decorum, and comfort never le him.
When the game was over, Stepan Arkadyevitch took Levin’s arm.
"Well, let us go to Anna’s, then. At once? Eh? She is at home. I promised
her long ago to bring you. Where were you meaning to spend the evening?"
"Oh, nowhere specially. I promised Sviazhsky to go to the Society of Agriculture. By all means, let us go," said Levin.
"Very good; come along. Find out if my carriage is here," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to the waiter.
Levin went up to the table, paid the forty roubles he had lost; paid his bill,
the amount of which was in some mysterious way ascertained by the lile old
waiter who stood at the counter, and swinging his arms he walked through all the
rooms to the way out.

Chapter 
"Oblonsky’s carriage!" the porter shouted in an angry bass. e carriage drove

dcxxii
up and both got in. It was only for the ﬁrst few moments, while the carriage
was driving out of the clubhouse gates, that Levin was still under the inﬂuence
of the club atmosphere of repose, comfort, and unimpeachable good form. But
as soon as the carriage drove out into the street, and he felt it jolting over the
uneven road, heard the angry shout of a sledge driver coming towards them, saw
in the uncertain light the red blind of a tavern and the shops, this impression
was dissipated, and he began to think over his actions, and to wonder whether
he was doing right in going to see Anna. What would Kiy say? But Stepan
Arkadyevitch gave him no time for reﬂection, and, as though divining his doubts,
he scaered them.
"How glad I am," he said, "that you should know her! You know Dolly has
long wished for it. And Lvov’s been to see her, and oen goes. ough she is my
sister," Stepan Arkadyevitch pursued, "I don’t hesitate to say that she’s a remarkable woman. But you will see. Her position is very painful, especially now."
"Why especially now?"
"We are carrying on negotiations with her husband about a divorce. And
he’s agreed; but there are diﬃculties in regard to the son, and the business, which
ought to have been arranged long ago, has been dragging on for three months
past. As soon as the divorce is over, she will marry Vronsky. How stupid these
old ceremonies are, that no one believes in, and which only prevent people being
comfortable!" Stepan Arkadyevitch put in. "Well, then their position will be as
regular as mine, as yours."
"What is the diﬃculty?" said Levin.
"Oh, it’s a long and tedious story! e whole business is in such an anomalous position with us. But the point is she has been for three months in Moscow,
where everyone knows her, waiting for the divorce; she goes out nowhere, sees no
woman except Dolly, because, do you understand, she doesn’t care to have people come as a favor. at fool Princess Varvara, even she has le her, considering
this a breach of propriety. Well, you see, in such a position any other woman
would not have found resources in herself. But you’ll see how she has arranged
her life—how calm, how digniﬁed she is. To the le, in the crescent opposite the
church!" shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch, leaning out of the window. "Phew! how
hot it is!" he said, in spite of twelve degrees of frost, ﬂinging his open overcoat
still wider open.
"But she has a daughter: no doubt she’s busy looking aer her?" said Levin.
"I believe you picture every woman simply as a female, une couveuse," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch. "If she’s occupied, it must be with her children. No, she
brings her up capitally, I believe, but one doesn’t hear about her. She’s busy, in
the ﬁrst place, with what she writes. I see you’re smiling ironically, but you’re
wrong. She’s writing a children’s book, and doesn’t talk about it to anyone, but she

dcxxiii
read it to me and I gave the manuscript to Vorkuev … you know the publisher …
and he’s an author himself too, I fancy. He understands those things, and he says
it’s a remarkable piece of work. But are you fancying she’s an authoress?—not a
bit of it. She’s a woman with a heart, before everything, but you’ll see. Now she
has a lile English girl with her, and a whole family she’s looking aer."
"Oh, something in a philanthropic way?"
"Why, you will look at everything in the worst light. It’s not from philanthropy, it’s from the heart. ey—that is, Vronsky—had a trainer, an Englishman, ﬁrst-rate in his own line, but a drunkard. He’s completely given up to
drink—delirium tremens—and the family were cast on the world. She saw them,
helped them, got more and more interested in them, and now the whole family
is on her hands. But not by way of patronage, you know, helping with money;
she’s herself preparing the boys in Russian for the high school, and she’s taken
the lile girl to live with her. But you’ll see her for yourself."
e carriage drove into the courtyard, and Stepan Arkadyevitch rang loudly
at the entrance where sledges were standing.
And without asking the servant who opened the door whether the lady were
at home, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked into the hall. Levin followed him, more and
more doubtful whether he was doing right or wrong.
Looking at himself in the glass, Levin noticed that he was red in the face,
but he felt certain he was not drunk, and he followed Stepan Arkadyevitch up the
carpeted stairs. At the top Stepan Arkadyevitch inquired of the footman, who
bowed to him as to an intimate friend, who was with Anna Arkadyevna, and
received the answer that it was M. Vorkuev.
"Where are they?"
"In the study."
Passing through the dining room, a room not very large, with dark, paneled
walls, Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin walked over the so carpet to the halfdark study, lighted up by a single lamp with a big dark shade. Another lamp
with a reﬂector was hanging on the wall, lighting up a big full-length portrait
of a woman, which Levin could not help looking at. It was the portrait of Anna,
painted in Italy by Mihailov. While Stepan Arkadyevitch went behind the treillage,
and the man’s voice which had been speaking paused, Levin gazed at the portrait,
which stood out from the frame in the brilliant light thrown on it, and he could
not tear himself away from it. He positively forgot where he was, and not even
hearing what was said, he could not take his eyes oﬀ the marvelous portrait. It was
not a picture, but a living, charming woman, with black curling hair, with bare
arms and shoulders, with a pensive smile on the lips, covered with so down;
triumphantly and soly she looked at him with eyes that baﬄed him. She was
not living only because she was more beautiful than a living woman can be.

dcxxiv
"I am delighted!" He heard suddenly near him a voice, unmistakably addressing him, the voice of the very woman he had been admiring in the portrait.
Anna had come from behind the treillage to meet him, and Levin saw in the dim
light of the study the very woman of the portrait, in a dark blue shot gown, not
in the same position nor with the same expression, but with the same perfection
of beauty which the artist had caught in the portrait. She was less dazzling in
reality, but, on the other hand, there was something fresh and seductive in the
living woman which was not in the portrait.

Chapter 
She had risen to meet him, not concealing her pleasure at seeing him; and in
the quiet ease with which she held out her lile vigorous hand, introduced him
to Vorkuev and indicated a red-haired, prey lile girl who was siing at work,
calling her her pupil, Levin recognized and liked the manners of a woman of the
great world, always self-possessed and natural.
"I am delighted, delighted," she repeated, and on her lips these simple words
took for Levin’s ears a special signiﬁcance. "I have known you and liked you for
a long while, both from your friendship with Stiva and for your wife’s sake…. I
knew her for a very short time, but she le on me the impression of an exquisite
ﬂower, simply a ﬂower. And to think she will soon be a mother!"
She spoke easily and without haste, looking now and then from Levin to
her brother, and Levin felt that the impression he was making was good, and he
felt immediately at home, simple and happy with her, as though he had known
her from childhood.
"Ivan Petrovitch and I seled in Alexey’s study," she said in answer to
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s question whether he might smoke, "just so as to be able
to smoke"—and glancing at Levin, instead of asking whether he would smoke, she
pulled closer a tortoise-shell cigar-case and took a cigaree.
"How are you feeling today?" her brother asked her.
"Oh, nothing. Nerves, as usual."
"Yes, isn’t it extraordinarily ﬁne?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, noticing that
Levin was scrutinizing the picture.
"I have never seen a beer portrait."
"And extraordinarily like, isn’t it?" said Vorkuev.
Levin looked from the portrait to the original. A peculiar brilliance lighted
up Anna’s face when she felt his eyes on her. Levin ﬂushed, and to cover his
confusion would have asked whether she had seen Darya Alexandrovna lately;
but at that moment Anna spoke. "We were just talking, Ivan Petrovitch and I, of

dcxxv
Vashtchenkov’s last pictures. Have you seen them?"
"Yes, I have seen them," answered Levin.
"But, I beg your pardon, I interrupted you … you were saying?…"
Levin asked if she had seen Dolly lately.
"She was here yesterday. She was very indignant with the high school people on Grisha’s account. e Latin teacher, it seems, had been unfair to him."
"Yes, I have seen his pictures. I didn’t care for them very much," Levin went
back to the subject she had started.
Levin talked now not at all with that purely businesslike aitude to the
subject with which he had been talking all the morning. Every word in his conversation with her had a special signiﬁcance. And talking to her was pleasant;
still pleasanter it was to listen to her.
Anna talked not merely naturally and cleverly, but cleverly and carelessly,
aaching no value to her own ideas and giving great weight to the ideas of the
person she was talking to.
e conversation turned on the new movement in art, on the new illustrations of the Bible by a French artist. Vorkuev aacked the artist for a realism
carried to the point of coarseness.
Levin said that the French had carried conventionality further than anyone,
and that consequently they see a great merit in the return to realism. In the fact
of not lying they see poetry.
Never had anything clever said by Levin given him so much pleasure as this
remark. Anna’s face lighted up at once, as at once she appreciated the thought.
She laughed.
"I laugh," she said, "as one laughs when one sees a very true portrait. What
you said so perfectly hits oﬀ French art now, painting and literature too, indeed—Zola, Daudet. But perhaps it is always so, that men form their conceptions
from ﬁctitious, conventional types, and then—all the combinaisons made—they are
tired of the ﬁctitious ﬁgures and begin to invent more natural, true ﬁgures."
"at’s perfectly true," said Vorknev.
"So you’ve been at the club?" she said to her brother.
"Yes, yes, this is a woman!" Levin thought, forgeing himself and staring
persistently at her lovely, mobile face, which at that moment was all at once completely transformed. Levin did not hear what she was talking of as she leaned over
to her brother, but he was struck by the change of her expression. Her face—so
handsome a moment before in its repose—suddenly wore a look of strange curiosity, anger, and pride. But this lasted only an instant. She dropped her eyelids, as
though recollecting something.
"Oh, well, but that’s of no interest to anyone," she said, and she turned to
the English girl.

dcxxvi
"Please order the tea in the drawing room," she said in English.
e girl got up and went out.
"Well, how did she get through her examination?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Splendidly! She’s a very gied child and a sweet character."
"It will end in your loving her more than your own."
"ere a man speaks. In love there’s no more nor less. I love my daughter
with one love, and her with another."
"I was just telling Anna Arkadyevna," said Vorkuev, "that if she were to put a
hundredth part of the energy she devotes to this English girl to the public question
of the education of Russian children, she would be doing a great and useful work."
"Yes, but I can’t help it; I couldn’t do it. Count Alexey Kirillovitch urged me
very much" (as she uered the words Count Alexey Kirillovit she glanced with
appealing timidity at Levin, and he unconsciously responded with a respectful
and reassuring look); "he urged me to take up the school in the village. I visited
it several times. e children were very nice, but I could not feel drawn to the
work. You speak of energy. Energy rests upon love; and come as it will, there’s
no forcing it. I took to this child—I could not myself say why."
And she glanced again at Levin. And her smile and her glance—all told him
that it was to him only she was addressing her words, valuing his good opinion,
and at the same time sure beforehand that they understood each other.
"I quite understand that," Levin answered. "It’s impossible to give one’s
heart to a school or such institutions in general, and I believe that’s just why
philanthropic institutions always give such poor results."
She was silent for a while, then she smiled.
"Yes, yes," she agreed; "I never could. Je n’ai pas le coeur assez large to love
a whole asylum of horrid lile girls. Cela ne m’a jamais réussi. ere are so many
women who have made themselves une position sociale in that way. And now more
than ever," she said with a mournful, conﬁding expression, ostensibly addressing
her brother, but unmistakably intending her words only for Levin, "now when
I have such need of some occupation, I cannot." And suddenly frowning (Levin
saw that she was frowning at herself for talking about hersel) she changed the
subject. "I know about you," she said to Levin; "that you’re not a public-spirited
citizen, and I have defended you to the best of my ability."
"How have you defended me?"
"Oh, according to the aacks made on you. But won’t you have some tea?"
She rose and took up a book bound in morocco.
"Give it to me, Anna Arkadyevna," said Vorkuev, indicating the book. "It’s
well worth taking up."
"Oh, no, it’s all so sketchy."

dcxxvii
"I told him about it," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his sister, nodding at Levin.
"You shouldn’t have. My writing is something aer the fashion of those lile
baskets and carving which Liza Mertsalova used to sell me from the prisons. She
had the direction of the prison department in that society," she turned to Levin;
"and they were miracles of patience, the work of those poor wretches."
And Levin saw a new trait in this woman, who aracted him so extraordinarily. Besides wit, grace, and beauty, she had truth. She had no wish to hide
from him all the bierness of her position. As she said that she sighed, and her
face suddenly taking a hard expression, looked as it were turned to stone. With
that expression on her face she was more beautiful than ever; but the expression
was new; it was uerly unlike that expression, radiant with happiness and creating happiness, which had been caught by the painter in her portrait. Levin looked
more than once at the portrait and at her ﬁgure, as taking her brother’s arm she
walked with him to the high doors and he felt for her a tenderness and pity at
which he wondered himself.
She asked Levin and Vorkuev to go into the drawing room, while she stayed
behind to say a few words to her brother. "About her divorce, about Vronsky, and
what he’s doing at the club, about me?" wondered Levin. And he was so keenly
interested by the question of what she was saying to Stepan Arkadyevitch, that
he scarcely heard what Vorkuev was telling him of the qualities of the story for
children Anna Arkadyevna had wrien.
At tea the same pleasant sort of talk, full of interesting maer, continued.
ere was not a single instant when a subject for conversation was to seek; on
the contrary, it was felt that one had hardly time to say what one had to say,
and eagerly held back to hear what the others were saying. And all that was
said, not only by her, but by Vorkuev and Stepan Arkadyevitch—all, so it seemed
to Levin, gained peculiar signiﬁcance from her appreciation and her criticism.
While he followed this interesting conversation, Levin was all the time admiring
her—her beauty, her intelligence, her culture, and at the same time her directness
and genuine depth of feeling. He listened and talked, and all the while he was
thinking of her inner life, trying to divine her feelings. And though he had judged
her so severely hitherto, now by some strange chain of reasoning he was justifying
her and was also sorry for her, and afraid that Vronsky did not fully understand
her. At eleven o’clock, when Stepan Arkadyevitch got up to go (Vorkuev had le
earlier), it seemed to Levin that he had only just come. Regretfully Levin too rose.
"Good-bye," she said, holding his hand and glancing into his face with a
winning look. "I am very glad que la glace est rompue."
She dropped his hand, and half closed her eyes.
"Tell your wife that I love her as before, and that if she cannot pardon me
my position, then my wish for her is that she may never pardon it. To pardon it,

dcxxviii
one must go through what I have gone through, and may God spare her that."
"Certainly, yes, I will tell her…" Levin said, blushing.

Chapter 
"What a marvelous, sweet and unhappy woman!" he was thinking, as he stepped
out into the frosty air with Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Well, didn’t I tell you?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, seeing that Levin had
been completely won over.
"Yes," said Levin dreamily, "an extraordinary woman! It’s not her cleverness,
but she has such wonderful depth of feeling. I’m awfully sorry for her!"
"Now, please God, everything will soon be seled. Well, well, don’t be hard
on people in future," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, opening the carriage door. "Goodbye; we don’t go the same way."
Still thinking of Anna, of everything, even the simplest phrase in their conversation with her, and recalling the minutest changes in her expression, entering
more and more into her position, and feeling sympathy for her, Levin reached
home.
At home Kouzma told Levin that Katerina Alexandrovna was quite well,
and that her sisters had not long been gone, and he handed him two leers. Levin
read them at once in the hall, that he might not over look them later. One was
from Sokolov, his bailiﬀ. Sokolov wrote that the corn could not be sold, that it
was fetching only ﬁve and a half roubles, and that more than that could not be
got for it. e other leer was from his sister. She scolded him for her business
being still unseled.
"Well, we must sell it at ﬁve and a half if we can’t get more," Levin decided
the ﬁrst question, which had always before seemed such a weighty one, with
extraordinary facility on the spot. "It’s extraordinary how all one’s time is taken
up here," he thought, considering the second leer. He felt himself to blame for
not having got done what his sister had asked him to do for her. "Today, again,
I’ve not been to the court, but today I’ve certainly not had time." And resolving
that he would not fail to do it next day, he went up to his wife. As he went
in, Levin rapidly ran through mentally the day he had spent. All the events of
the day were conversations, conversations he had heard and taken part in. All
the conversations were upon subjects which, if he had been alone at home, he
would never have taken up, but here they were very interesting. And all these
conversations were right enough, only in two places there was something not
quite right. One was what he had said about the carp, the other was something
not "quite the thing" in the tender sympathy he was feeling for Anna.

dcxxix
Levin found his wife low-spirited and dull. e dinner of the three sisters
had gone oﬀ very well, but then they had waited and waited for him, all of them
had felt dull, the sisters had departed, and she had been le alone.
"Well, and what have you been doing?" she asked him, looking straight into
his eyes, which shone with rather a suspicious brightness. But that she might not
prevent his telling her everything, she concealed her close scrutiny of him, and
with an approving smile listened to his account of how he had spent the evening.
"Well, I’m very glad I met Vronsky. I felt quite at ease and natural with him.
You understand, I shall try not to see him, but I’m glad that this awkwardness
is all over," he said, and remembering that by way of trying not to see him, he
had immediately gone to call on Anna, he blushed. "We talk about the peasants
drinking; I don’t know which drinks most, the peasantry or our own class; the
peasants do on holidays, but…"
But Kiy took not the slightest interest in discussing the drinking habits of
the peasants. She saw that he blushed, and she wanted to know why.
"Well, and then where did you go?"
"Stiva urged me awfully to go and see Anna Arkadyevna."
And as he said this, Levin blushed even more, and his doubts as to whether
he had done right in going to see Anna were seled once for all. He knew now
that he ought not to have done so.
Kiy’s eyes opened in a curious way and gleamed at Anna’s name, but controlling herself with an eﬀort, she concealed her emotion and deceived him.
"Oh!" was all she said.
"I’m sure you won’t be angry at my going. Stiva begged me to, and Dolly
wished it," Levin went on.
"Oh, no!" she said, but he saw in her eyes a constraint that boded him no
good.
"She is a very sweet, very, very unhappy, good woman," he said, telling her
about Anna, her occupations, and what she had told him to say to her.
"Yes, of course, she is very much to be pitied," said Kiy, when he had ﬁnished. "Whom was your leer from?"
He told her, and believing in her calm tone, he went to change his coat.
Coming back, he found Kiy in the same easy chair. When he went up to
her, she glanced at him and broke into sobs.
"What? what is it?" he asked, knowing beforehand what.
"You’re in love with that hateful woman; she has bewitched you! I saw it
in your eyes. Yes, yes! What can it all lead to? You were drinking at the club,
drinking and gambling, and then you went … to her of all people! No, we must
go away…. I shall go away tomorrow."
It was a long while before Levin could soothe his wife. At last he succeeded

dcxxx
in calming her, only by confessing that a feeling of pity, in conjunction with the
wine he had drunk, had been too much for him, that he had succumbed to Anna’s
artful inﬂuence, and that he would avoid her. One thing he did with more sincerity
confess to was that living so long in Moscow, a life of nothing but conversation,
eating and drinking, he was degenerating. ey talked till three o’clock in the
morning. Only at three o’clock were they suﬃciently reconciled to be able to go
to sleep.

Chapter 
Aer taking leave of her guests, Anna did not sit down, but began walking up
and down the room. She had unconsciously the whole evening done her utmost
to arouse in Levin a feeling of love—as of late she had fallen into doing with all
young men—and she knew she had aained her aim, as far as was possible in one
evening, with a married and conscientious man. She liked him indeed extremely,
and, in spite of the striking diﬀerence, from the masculine point of view, between
Vronsky and Levin, as a woman she saw something they had in common, which
had made Kiy able to love both. Yet as soon as he was out of the room, she
ceased to think of him.
One thought, and one only, pursued her in diﬀerent forms, and refused to
be shaken oﬀ. "If I have so much eﬀect on others, on this man, who loves his
home and his wife, why is it he is so cold to me?… not cold exactly, he loves
me, I know that! But something new is drawing us apart now. Why wasn’t he
here all the evening? He told Stiva to say he could not leave Yashvin, and must
watch over his play. Is Yashvin a child? But supposing it’s true. He never tells
a lie. But there’s something else in it if it’s true. He is glad of an opportunity
of showing me that he has other duties; I know that, I submit to that. But why
prove that to me? He wants to show me that his love for me is not to interfere
with his freedom. But I need no proofs, I need love. He ought to understand all
the bierness of this life for me here in Moscow. Is this life? I am not living, but
waiting for an event, which is continually put oﬀ and put oﬀ. No answer again!
And Stiva says he cannot go to Alexey Alexandrovitch. And I can’t write again.
I can do nothing, can begin nothing, can alter nothing; I hold myself in, I wait,
inventing amusements for myself—the English family, writing, reading—but it’s
all nothing but a sham, it’s all the same as morphine. He ought to feel for me," she
said, feeling tears of self-pity coming into her eyes.
She heard Vronsky’s abrupt ring and hurriedly dried her tears—not only
dried her tears, but sat down by a lamp and opened a book, aﬀecting composure.
She wanted to show him that she was displeased that he had not come home as he

dcxxxi
had promised—displeased only, and not on any account to let him see her distress,
and least of all, her self-pity. She might pity herself, but he must not pity her. She
did not want strife, she blamed him for wanting to quarrel, but unconsciously put
herself into an aitude of antagonism.
"Well, you’ve not been dull?" he said, eagerly and good-humoredly, going
up to her. "What a terrible passion it is—gambling!"
"No, I’ve not been dull; I’ve learned long ago not to be dull. Stiva has been
here and Levin."
"Yes, they meant to come and see you. Well, how did you like Levin?" he
said, siing down beside her.
"Very much. ey have not long been gone. What was Yashvin doing?"
"He was winning—seventeen thousand. I got him away. He had really
started home, but he went back again, and now he’s losing."
"en what did you stay for?" she asked, suddenly liing her eyes to him.
e expression of her face was cold and ungracious. "You told Stiva you were
staying on to get Yashvin away. And you have le him there."
e same expression of cold readiness for the conﬂict appeared on his face
too.
"In the ﬁrst place, I did not ask him to give you any message; and secondly,
I never tell lies. But what’s the chief point, I wanted to stay, and I stayed," he said,
frowning. "Anna, what is it for, why will you?" he said aer a moment’s silence,
bending over towards her, and he opened his hand, hoping she would lay hers in
it.
She was glad of this appeal for tenderness. But some strange force of evil
would not let her give herself up to her feelings, as though the rules of warfare
would not permit her to surrender.
"Of course you wanted to stay, and you stayed. You do everything you want
to. But what do you tell me that for? With what object?" she said, geing more
and more excited. "Does anyone contest your rights? But you want to be right,
and you’re welcome to be right."
His hand closed, he turned away, and his face wore a still more obstinate
expression.
"For you it’s a maer of obstinacy," she said, watching him intently and
suddenly ﬁnding the right word for that expression that irritated her, "simply
obstinacy. For you it’s a question of whether you keep the upper hand of me,
while for me…." Again she felt sorry for herself, and she almost burst into tears.
"If you knew what it is for me! When I feel as I do now that you are hostile, yes,
hostile to me, if you knew what this means for me! If you knew how I feel on
the brink of calamity at this instant, how afraid I am of myself!" And she turned
away, hiding her sobs.

dcxxxii
"But what are you talking about?" he said, horriﬁed at her expression of
despair, and again bending over her, he took her hand and kissed it. "What is
it for? Do I seek amusements outside our home? Don’t I avoid the society of
women?"
"Well, yes! If that were all!" she said.
"Come, tell me what I ought to do to give you peace of mind? I am ready to
do anything to make you happy," he said, touched by her expression of despair;
"what wouldn’t I do to save you from distress of any sort, as now, Anna!" he said.
"It’s nothing, nothing!" she said. "I don’t know myself whether it’s the solitary life, my nerves…. Come, don’t let us talk of it. What about the race? You
haven’t told me!" she inquired, trying to conceal her triumph at the victory, which
had anyway been on her side.
He asked for supper, and began telling her about the races; but in his tone,
in his eyes, which became more and more cold, she saw that he did not forgive her
for her victory, that the feeling of obstinacy with which she had been struggling
had asserted itself again in him. He was colder to her than before, as though he
were regreing his surrender. And she, remembering the words that had given
her the victory, "how I feel on the brink of calamity, how afraid I am of myself,"
saw that this weapon was a dangerous one, and that it could not be used a second
time. And she felt that beside the love that bound them together there had grown
up between them some evil spirit of strife, which she could not exorcise from his,
and still less from her own heart.

Chapter 
ere are no conditions to which a man cannot become used, especially if he sees
that all around him are living in the same way. Levin could not have believed
three months before that he could have gone quietly to sleep in the condition in
which he was that day, that leading an aimless, irrational life, living too beyond
his means, aer drinking to excess (he could not call what happened at the club
anything else), forming inappropriately friendly relations with a man with whom
his wife had once been in love, and a still more inappropriate call upon a woman
who could only be called a lost woman, aer being fascinated by that woman
and causing his wife distress—he could still go quietly to sleep. But under the
inﬂuence of fatigue, a sleepless night, and the wine he had drunk, his sleep was
sound and untroubled.
At ﬁve o’clock the creak of a door opening waked him. He jumped up and
looked round. Kiy was not in bed beside him. But there was a light moving
behind the screen, and he heard her steps.

dcxxxiii
"What is it?… what is it?" he said, half-asleep. "Kiy! What is it?"
"Nothing," she said, coming from behind the screen with a candle in her
hand. "I felt unwell," she said, smiling a particularly sweet and meaning smile.
"What? has it begun?" he said in terror. "We ought to send…" and hurriedly
he reached aer his clothes.
"No, no," she said, smiling and holding his hand. "It’s sure to be nothing. I
was rather unwell, only a lile. It’s all over now."
And geing into bed, she blew out the candle, lay down and was still.
ough he thought her stillness suspicious, as though she were holding her breath,
and still more suspicious the expression of peculiar tenderness and excitement
with which, as she came from behind the screen, she said "nothing," he was so
sleepy that he fell asleep at once. Only later he remembered the stillness of her
breathing, and understood all that must have been passing in her sweet, precious
heart while she lay beside him, not stirring, in anticipation of the greatest event
in a woman’s life. At seven o’clock he was waked by the touch of her hand on his
shoulder, and a gentle whisper. She seemed struggling between regret at waking
him, and the desire to talk to him.
"Kostya, don’t be frightened. It’s all right. But I fancy…. We ought to send
for Lizaveta Petrovna."
e candle was lighted again. She was siing up in bed, holding some knitting, which she had been busy upon during the last few days.
"Please, don’t be frightened, it’s all right. I’m not a bit afraid," she said,
seeing his scared face, and she pressed his hand to her bosom and then to her lips.
He hurriedly jumped up, hardly awake, and kept his eyes ﬁxed on her, as he
put on his dressing gown; then he stopped, still looking at her. He had to go, but
he could not tear himself from her eyes. He thought he loved her face, knew her
expression, her eyes, but never had he seen it like this. How hateful and horrible
he seemed to himself, thinking of the distress he had caused her yesterday. Her
ﬂushed face, fringed with so curling hair under her night cap, was radiant with
joy and courage.
ough there was so lile that was complex or artiﬁcial in Kiy’s character
in general, Levin was struck by what was revealed now, when suddenly all disguises were thrown oﬀ and the very kernel of her soul shone in her eyes. And in
this simplicity and nakedness of her soul, she, the very woman he loved in her,
was more manifest than ever. She looked at him, smiling; but all at once her brows
twitched, she threw up her head, and going quickly up to him, clutched his hand
and pressed close up to him, breathing her hot breath upon him. She was in pain
and was, as it were, complaining to him of her suﬀering. And for the ﬁrst minute,
from habit, it seemed to him that he was to blame. But in her eyes there was a
tenderness that told him that she was far from reproaching him, that she loved

dcxxxiv
him for her suﬀerings. "If not I, who is to blame for it?" he thought unconsciously,
seeking someone responsible for this suﬀering for him to punish; but there was
no one responsible. She was suﬀering, complaining, and triumphing in her sufferings, and rejoicing in them, and loving them. He saw that something sublime
was being accomplished in her soul, but what? He could not make it out. It was
beyond his understanding.
"I have sent to mamma. You go quickly to fetch Lizaveta Petrovna …
Kostya!… Nothing, it’s over."
She moved away from him and rang the bell.
"Well, go now; Pasha’s coming. I am all right."
And Levin saw with astonishment that she had taken up the kniing she
had brought in in the night and begun working at it again.
As Levin was going out of one door, he heard the maid-servant come in at
the other. He stood at the door and heard Kiy giving exact directions to the
maid, and beginning to help her move the bedstead.
He dressed, and while they were puing in his horses, as a hired sledge was
not to be seen yet, he ran again up to the bedroom, not on tiptoe, it seemed to
him, but on wings. Two maid-servants were carefully moving something in the
bedroom.
Kiy was walking about kniing rapidly and giving directions.
"I’m going for the doctor. ey have sent for Lizaveta Petrovna, but I’ll go
on there too. Isn’t there anything wanted? Yes, shall I go to Dolly’s?"
She looked at him, obviously not hearing what he was saying.
"Yes, yes. Do go," she said quickly, frowning and waving her hand to him.
He had just gone into the drawing room, when suddenly a plaintive moan
sounded from the bedroom, smothered instantly. He stood still, and for a long
while he could not understand.
"Yes, that is she," he said to himself, and clutching at his head he ran downstairs.
"Lord have mercy on us! pardon us! aid us!" he repeated the words that
for some reason came suddenly to his lips. And he, an unbeliever, repeated these
words not with his lips only. At that instant he knew that all his doubts, even the
impossibility of believing with his reason, of which he was aware in himself, did
not in the least hinder his turning to God. All of that now ﬂoated out of his soul
like dust. To whom was he to turn if not to Him in whose hands he felt himself,
his soul, and his love?
e horse was not yet ready, but feeling a peculiar concentration of his
physical forces and his intellect on what he had to do, he started oﬀ on foot without waiting for the horse, and told Kouzma to overtake him.
At the corner he met a night cabman driving hurriedly. In the lile sledge,

dcxxxv
wrapped in a velvet cloak, sat Lizaveta Petrovna with a kerchief round her head.
"ank God! thank God!" he said, overjoyed to recognize her lile fair face which
wore a peculiarly serious, even stern expression. Telling the driver not to stop, he
ran along beside her.
"For two hours, then? Not more?" she inquired. "You should let Pyotr
Dmitrievitch know, but don’t hurry him. And get some opium at the chemist’s."
"So you think that it may go on well? Lord have mercy on us and help us!"
Levin said, seeing his own horse driving out of the gate. Jumping into the sledge
beside Kouzma, he told him to drive to the doctor’s.

Chapter 
e doctor was not yet up, and the footman said that "he had been up late, and had
given orders not to be waked, but would get up soon." e footman was cleaning
the lamp-chimneys, and seemed very busy about them. is concentration of the
footman upon his lamps, and his indiﬀerence to what was passing in Levin, at ﬁrst
astounded him, but immediately on considering the question he realized that no
one knew or was bound to know his feelings, and that it was all the more necessary
to act calmly, sensibly, and resolutely to get through this wall of indiﬀerence and
aain his aim.
"Don’t be in a hurry or let anything slip," Levin said to himself, feeling a
greater and greater ﬂow of physical energy and aention to all that lay before
him to do.
Having ascertained that the doctor was not geing up, Levin considered
various plans, and decided on the following one: that Kouzma should go for another doctor, while he himself should go to the chemist’s for opium, and if when
he came back the doctor had not yet begun to get up, he would either by tipping
the footman, or by force, wake the doctor at all hazards.
At the chemist’s the lank shopman sealed up a packet of powders for a
coachman who stood waiting, and refused him opium with the same callousness
with which the doctor’s footman had cleaned his lamp chimneys. Trying not to
get ﬂurried or out of temper, Levin mentioned the names of the doctor and midwife, and explaining what the opium was needed for, tried to persuade him. e
assistant inquired in German whether he should give it, and receiving an aﬃrmative reply from behind the partition, he took out a bole and a funnel, deliberately
poured the opium from a bigger bole into a lile one, stuck on a label, sealed
it up, in spite of Levin’s request that he would not do so, and was about to wrap
it up too. is was more than Levin could stand; he took the bole ﬁrmly out of
his hands, and ran to the big glass doors. e doctor was not even now geing

dcxxxvi
up, and the footman, busy now in puing down the rugs, refused to wake him.
Levin deliberately took out a ten rouble note, and, careful to speak slowly, though
losing no time over the business, he handed him the note, and explained that Pyotr Dmitrievitch (what a great and important personage he seemed to Levin now,
this Pyotr Dmitrievitch, who had been of so lile consequence in his eyes before!)
had promised to come at any time; that he would certainly not be angry! and that
he must therefore wake him at once.
e footman agreed, and went upstairs, taking Levin into the waiting room.
Levin could hear through the door the doctor coughing, moving about,
washing, and saying something. ree minutes passed; it seemed to Levin that
more than an hour had gone by. He could not wait any longer.
"Pyotr Dmitrievitch, Pyotr Dmitrievitch!" he said in an imploring voice at
the open door. "For God’s sake, forgive me! See me as you are. It’s been going on
more than two hours already."
"In a minute; in a minute!" answered a voice, and to his amazement Levin
heard that the doctor was smiling as he spoke.
"For one instant."
"In a minute."
Two minutes more passed while the doctor was puing on his boots, and
two minutes more while the doctor put on his coat and combed his hair.
"Pyotr Dmitrievitch!" Levin was beginning again in a plaintive voice, just as
the doctor came in dressed and ready. "ese people have no conscience," thought
Levin. "Combing his hair, while we’re dying!"
"Good morning!" the doctor said to him, shaking hands, and, as it were,
teasing him with his composure. "ere’s no hurry. Well now?"
Trying to be as accurate as possible, Levin began to tell him every unnecessary detail of his wife’s condition, interrupting his account repeatedly with entreaties that the doctor would come with him at once.
"Oh, you needn’t be in any hurry. You don’t understand, you know. I’m
certain I’m not wanted, still I’ve promised, and if you like, I’ll come. But there’s
no hurry. Please sit down; won’t you have some coﬀee?"
Levin stared at him with eyes that asked whether he was laughing at him;
but the doctor had no notion of making fun of him.
"I know, I know," the doctor said, smiling; "I’m a married man myself; and
at these moments we husbands are very much to be pitied. I’ve a patient whose
husband always takes refuge in the stables on such occasions."
"But what do you think, Pyotr Dmitrievitch? Do you suppose it may go all
right?"
"Everything points to a favorable issue."
"So you’ll come immediately?" said Levin, looking wrathfully at the servant

dcxxxvii
who was bringing in the coﬀee.
"In an hour’s time."
"Oh, for mercy’s sake!"
"Well, let me drink my coﬀee, anyway."
e doctor started upon his coﬀee. Both were silent.
"e Turks are really geing beaten, though. Did you read yesterday’s telegrams?" said the doctor, munching some roll.
"No, I can’t stand it!" said Levin, jumping up. "So you’ll be with us in a
quarter of an hour."
"In half an hour."
"On your honor?"
When Levin got home, he drove up at the same time as the princess, and
they went up to the bedroom door together. e princess had tears in her eyes,
and her hands were shaking. Seeing Levin, she embraced him, and burst into
tears.
"Well, my dear Lizaveta Petrovna?" she queried, clasping the hand of the
midwife, who came out to meet them with a beaming and anxious face.
"She’s going on well," she said; "persuade her to lie down. She will be easier
so."
From the moment when he had waked up and understood what was going
on, Levin had prepared his mind to bear resolutely what was before him, and
without considering or anticipating anything, to avoid upseing his wife, and on
the contrary to soothe her and keep up her courage. Without allowing himself
even to think of what was to come, of how it would end, judging from his inquiries
as to the usual duration of these ordeals, Levin had in his imagination braced
himself to bear up and to keep a tight rein on his feelings for ﬁve hours, and it
had seemed to him he could do this. But when he came back from the doctor’s and
saw her suﬀerings again, he fell to repeating more and more frequently: "Lord,
have mercy on us, and succor us!" He sighed, and ﬂung his head up, and began to
feel afraid he could not bear it, that he would burst into tears or run away. Such
agony it was to him. And only one hour had passed.
But aer that hour there passed another hour, two hours, three, the full
ﬁve hours he had ﬁxed as the furthest limit of his suﬀerings, and the position
was still unchanged; and he was still bearing it because there was nothing to be
done but bear it; every instant feeling that he had reached the utmost limits of his
endurance, and that his heart would break with sympathy and pain.
But still the minutes passed by and the hours, and still hours more, and his
misery and horror grew and were more and more intense.
All the ordinary conditions of life, without which one can form no conception of anything, had ceased to exist for Levin. He lost all sense of time. Min-

dcxxxviii
utes—those minutes when she sent for him and he held her moist hand, that would
squeeze his hand with extraordinary violence and then push it away—seemed to
him hours, and hours seemed to him minutes. He was surprised when Lizaveta
Petrovna asked him to light a candle behind a screen, and he found that it was ﬁve
o’clock in the aernoon. If he had been told it was only ten o’clock in the morning,
he would not have been more surprised. Where he was all this time, he knew as
lile as the time of anything. He saw her swollen face, sometimes bewildered and
in agony, sometimes smiling and trying to reassure him. He saw the old princess
too, ﬂushed and overwrought, with her gray curls in disorder, forcing herself to
gulp down her tears, biting her lips; he saw Dolly too and the doctor, smoking fat
cigarees, and Lizaveta Petrovna with a ﬁrm, resolute, reassuring face, and the
old prince walking up and down the hall with a frowning face. But why they came
in and went out, where they were, he did not know. e princess was with the
doctor in the bedroom, then in the study, where a table set for dinner suddenly
appeared; then she was not there, but Dolly was. en Levin remembered he had
been sent somewhere. Once he had been sent to move a table and sofa. He had
done this eagerly, thinking it had to be done for her sake, and only later on he
found it was his own bed he had been geing ready. en he had been sent to the
study to ask the doctor something. e doctor had answered and then had said
something about the irregularities in the municipal council. en he had been
sent to the bedroom to help the old princess to move the holy picture in its silver
and gold seing, and with the princess’s old waiting maid he had clambered on a
shelf to reach it and had broken the lile lamp, and the old servant had tried to
reassure him about the lamp and about his wife, and he carried the holy picture
and set it at Kiy’s head, carefully tucking it in behind the pillow. But where,
when, and why all this had happened, he could not tell. He did not understand
why the old princess took his hand, and looking compassionately at him, begged
him not to worry himself, and Dolly persuaded him to eat something and led him
out of the room, and even the doctor looked seriously and with commiseration at
him and oﬀered him a drop of something.
All he knew and felt was that what was happening was what had happened
nearly a year before in the hotel of the country town at the deathbed of his brother
Nikolay. But that had been grief—this was joy. Yet that grief and this joy were
alike outside all the ordinary conditions of life; they were loop-holes, as it were, in
that ordinary life through which there came glimpses of something sublime. And
in the contemplation of this sublime something the soul was exalted to inconceivable heights of which it had before had no conception, while reason lagged
behind, unable to keep up with it.
"Lord, have mercy on us, and succor us!" he repeated to himself incessantly,
feeling, in spite of his long and, as it seemed, complete alienation from religion,

dcxxxix
that he turned to God just as trustfully and simply as he had in his childhood and
ﬁrst youth.
All this time he had two distinct spiritual conditions. One was away from
her, with the doctor, who kept smoking one fat cigaree aer another and extinguishing them on the edge of a full ash tray, with Dolly, and with the old prince,
where there was talk about dinner, about politics, about Marya Petrovna’s illness,
and where Levin suddenly forgot for a minute what was happening, and felt as
though he had waked up from sleep; the other was in her presence, at her pillow, where his heart seemed breaking and still did not break from sympathetic
suﬀering, and he prayed to God without ceasing. And every time he was brought
back from a moment of oblivion by a scream reaching him from the bedroom, he
fell into the same strange terror that had come upon him the ﬁrst minute. Every
time he heard a shriek, he jumped up, ran to justify himself, remembered on the
way that he was not to blame, and he longed to defend her, to help her. But as
he looked at her, he saw again that help was impossible, and he was ﬁlled with
terror and prayed: "Lord, have mercy on us, and help us!" And as time went on,
both these conditions became more intense; the calmer he became away from her,
completely forgeing her, the more agonizing became both her suﬀerings and his
feeling of helplessness before them. He jumped up, would have liked to run away,
but ran to her.
Sometimes, when again and again she called upon him, he blamed her; but
seeing her patient, smiling face, and hearing the words, "I am worrying you," he
threw the blame on God; but thinking of God, at once he fell to beseeching God
to forgive him and have mercy.

Chapter 
He did not know whether it was late or early. e candles had all burned out.
Dolly had just been in the study and had suggested to the doctor that he should
lie down. Levin sat listening to the doctor’s stories of a quack mesmerizer and
looking at the ashes of his cigaree. ere had been a period of repose, and he
had sunk into oblivion. He had completely forgoen what was going on now.
He heard the doctor’s chat and understood it. Suddenly there came an unearthly
shriek. e shriek was so awful that Levin did not even jump up, but holding
his breath, gazed in terriﬁed inquiry at the doctor. e doctor put his head on
one side, listened, and smiled approvingly. Everything was so extraordinary that
nothing could strike Levin as strange. "I suppose it must be so," he thought, and
still sat where he was. Whose scream was this? He jumped up, ran on tiptoe to
the bedroom, edged round Lizaveta Petrovna and the princess, and took up his

dcxl
position at Kiy’s pillow. e scream had subsided, but there was some change
now. What it was he did not see and did not comprehend, and he had no wish
to see or comprehend. But he saw it by the face of Lizaveta Petrovna. Lizaveta
Petrovna’s face was stern and pale, and still as resolute, though her jaws were
twitching, and her eyes were ﬁxed intently on Kiy. Kiy’s swollen and agonized
face, a tress of hair clinging to her moist brow, was turned to him and sought his
eyes. Her lied hands asked for his hands. Clutching his chill hands in her moist
ones, she began squeezing them to her face.
"Don’t go, don’t go! I’m not afraid, I’m not afraid!" she said rapidly.
"Mamma, take my earrings. ey bother me. You’re not afraid? ick, quick,
Lizaveta Petrovna…"
She spoke quickly, very quickly, and tried to smile. But suddenly her face
was drawn, she pushed him away.
"Oh, this is awful! I’m dying, I’m dying! Go away!" she shrieked, and again
he heard that unearthly scream.
Levin clutched at his head and ran out of the room.
"It’s nothing, it’s nothing, it’s all right," Dolly called aer him.
But they might say what they liked, he knew now that all was over. He
stood in the next room, his head leaning against the door post, and heard shrieks,
howls such as he had never heard before, and he knew that what had been Kiy
was uering these shrieks. He had long ago ceased to wish for the child. By now
he loathed this child. He did not even wish for her life now, all he longed for was
the end of this awful anguish.
"Doctor! What is it? What is it? By God!" he said, snatching at the doctor’s
hand as he came up.
"It’s the end," said the doctor. And the doctor’s face was so grave as he said
it that Levin took the end as meaning her death.
Beside himself, he ran into the bedroom. e ﬁrst thing he saw was the face
of Lizaveta Petrovna. It was even more frowning and stern. Kiy’s face he did
not know. In the place where it had been was something that was fearful in its
strained distortion and in the sounds that came from it. He fell down with his
head on the wooden framework of the bed, feeling that his heart was bursting.
e awful scream never paused, it became still more awful, and as though it had
reached the utmost limit of terror, suddenly it ceased. Levin could not believe his
ears, but there could be no doubt; the scream had ceased and he heard a subdued
stir and bustle, and hurried breathing, and her voice, gasping, alive, tender, and
blissful, uered soly, "It’s over!"
He lied his head. With her hands hanging exhausted on the quilt, looking
extraordinarily lovely and serene, she looked at him in silence and tried to smile,
and could not.

dcxli
And suddenly, from the mysterious and awful far-away world in which he
had been living for the last twenty-two hours, Levin felt himself all in an instant
borne back to the old every-day world, gloriﬁed though now, by such a radiance
of happiness that he could not bear it. e strained chords snapped, sobs and tears
of joy which he had never foreseen rose up with such violence that his whole body
shook, that for long they prevented him from speaking.
Falling on his knees before the bed, he held his wife’s hand before his lips
and kissed it, and the hand, with a weak movement of the ﬁngers, responded to
his kiss. And meanwhile, there at the foot of the bed, in the de hands of Lizaveta
Petrovna, like a ﬂickering light in a lamp, lay the life of a human creature, which
had never existed before, and which would now with the same right, with the
same importance to itself, live and create in its own image.
"Alive! alive! And a boy too! Set your mind at rest!" Levin heard Lizaveta
Petrovna saying, as she slapped the baby’s back with a shaking hand.
"Mamma, is it true?" said Kiy’s voice.
e princess’s sobs were all the answers she could make. And in the midst
of the silence there came in unmistakable reply to the mother’s question, a voice
quite unlike the subdued voices speaking in the room. It was the bold, clamorous,
self-assertive squall of the new human being, who had so incomprehensibly appeared.
If Levin had been told before that Kiy was dead, and that he had died with
her, and that their children were angels, and that God was standing before him,
he would have been surprised at nothing. But now, coming back to the world
of reality, he had to make great mental eﬀorts to take in that she was alive and
well, and that the creature squalling so desperately was his son. Kiy was alive,
her agony was over. And he was unuerably happy. at he understood; he was
completely happy in it. But the baby? Whence, why, who was he?… He could
not get used to the idea. It seemed to him something extraneous, superﬂuous, to
which he could not accustom himself.

Chapter 
At ten o’clock the old prince, Sergey Ivanovitch, and Stepan Arkadyevitch were
siing at Levin’s. Having inquired aer Kiy, they had dropped into conversation
upon other subjects. Levin heard them, and unconsciously, as they talked, going
over the past, over what had been up to that morning, he thought of himself
as he had been yesterday till that point. It was as though a hundred years had
passed since then. He felt himself exalted to unaainable heights, from which
he studiously lowered himself so as not to wound the people he was talking to.

dcxlii
He talked, and was all the time thinking of his wife, of her condition now, of
his son, in whose existence he tried to school himself into believing. e whole
world of woman, which had taken for him since his marriage a new value he had
never suspected before, was now so exalted that he could not take it in in his
imagination. He heard them talk of yesterday’s dinner at the club, and thought:
"What is happening with her now? Is she asleep? How is she? What is she
thinking o? Is he crying, my son Dmitri?" And in the middle of the conversation,
in the middle of a sentence, he jumped up and went out of the room.
"Send me word if I can see her," said the prince.
"Very well, in a minute," answered Levin, and without stopping, he went to
her room.
She was not asleep, she was talking gently with her mother, making plans
about the christening.
Carefully set to rights, with hair well-brushed, in a smart lile cap with
some blue in it, her arms out on the quilt, she was lying on her back. Meeting his
eyes, her eyes drew him to her. Her face, bright before, brightened still more as
he drew near her. ere was the same change in it from earthly to unearthly that
is seen in the face of the dead. But then it means farewell, here it meant welcome.
Again a rush of emotion, such as he had felt at the moment of the child’s birth,
ﬂooded his heart. She took his hand and asked him if he had slept. He could not
answer, and turned away, struggling with his weakness.
"I have had a nap, Kostya!" she said to him; "and I am so comfortable now."
She looked at him, but suddenly her expression changed.
"Give him to me," she said, hearing the baby’s cry. "Give him to me, Lizaveta
Petrovna, and he shall look at him."
"To be sure, his papa shall look at him," said Lizaveta Petrovna, geing up
and bringing something red, and queer, and wriggling. "Wait a minute, we’ll
make him tidy ﬁrst," and Lizaveta Petrovna laid the red wobbling thing on the
bed, began untrussing and trussing up the baby, liing it up and turning it over
with one ﬁnger and powdering it with something.
Levin, looking at the tiny, pitiful creature, made strenuous eﬀorts to discover
in his heart some traces of fatherly feeling for it. He felt nothing towards it but
disgust. But when it was undressed and he caught a glimpse of wee, wee, lile
hands, lile feet, saﬀron-colored, with lile toes, too, and positively with a lile
big toe diﬀerent from the rest, and when he saw Lizaveta Petrovna closing the
wide-open lile hands, as though they were so springs, and puing them into
linen garments, such pity for the lile creature came upon him, and such terror
that she would hurt it, that he held her hand back.
Lizaveta Petrovna laughed.
"Don’t be frightened, don’t be frightened!"

dcxliii
When the baby had been put to rights and transformed into a ﬁrm doll,
Lizaveta Petrovna dandled it as though proud of her handiwork, and stood a lile
away so that Levin might see his son in all his glory.
Kiy looked sideways in the same direction, never taking her eyes oﬀ the
baby. "Give him to me! give him to me!" she said, and even made as though she
would sit up.
"What are you thinking of, Katerina Alexandrovna, you mustn’t move like
that! Wait a minute. I’ll give him to you. Here we’re showing papa what a ﬁne
fellow we are!"
And Lizaveta Petrovna, with one hand supporting the wobbling head, lied
up on the other arm the strange, limp, red creature, whose head was lost in its
swaddling clothes. But it had a nose, too, and slanting eyes and smacking lips.
"A splendid baby!" said Lizaveta Petrovna.
Levin sighed with mortiﬁcation. is splendid baby excited in him no feeling but disgust and compassion. It was not at all the feeling he had looked forward
to.
He turned away while Lizaveta Petrovna put the baby to the unaccustomed
breast.
Suddenly laughter made him look round. e baby had taken the breast.
"Come, that’s enough, that’s enough!" said Lizaveta Petrovna, but Kiy
would not let the baby go. He fell asleep in her arms.
"Look, now," said Kiy, turning the baby so that he could see it. e agedlooking lile face suddenly puckered up still more and the baby sneezed.
Smiling, hardly able to restrain his tears, Levin kissed his wife and went out
of the dark room. What he felt towards this lile creature was uerly unlike what
he had expected. ere was nothing cheerful and joyous in the feeling; on the
contrary, it was a new torture of apprehension. It was the consciousness of a new
sphere of liability to pain. And this sense was so painful at ﬁrst, the apprehension
lest this helpless creature should suﬀer was so intense, that it prevented him from
noticing the strange thrill of senseless joy and even pride that he had felt when
the baby sneezed.

Chapter 
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s aﬀairs were in a very bad way.
e money for two-thirds of the forest had all been spent already, and he
had borrowed from the merchant in advance at ten per cent discount, almost all
the remaining third. e merchant would not give more, especially as Darya
Alexandrovna, for the ﬁrst time that winter insisting on her right to her own

dcxliv
property, had refused to sign the receipt for the payment of the last third of the
forest. All his salary went on household expenses and in payment of pey debts
that could not be put oﬀ. ere was positively no money.
is was unpleasant and awkward, and in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s opinion
things could not go on like this. e explanation of the position was, in his view,
to be found in the fact that his salary was too small. e post he ﬁlled had been
unmistakably very good ﬁve years ago, but it was so no longer.
Petrov, the bank director, had twelve thousand; Sventitsky, a company director, had seventeen thousand; Mitin, who had founded a bank, received ﬁy
thousand.
"Clearly I’ve been napping, and they’ve overlooked me," Stepan Arkadyevitch thought about himself. And he began keeping his eyes and ears open, and
towards the end of the winter he had discovered a very good berth and had formed
a plan of aack upon it, at ﬁrst from Moscow through aunts, uncles, and friends,
and then, when the maer was well advanced, in the spring, he went himself to
Petersburg. It was one of those snug, lucrative berths of which there are so many
more nowadays than there used to be, with incomes ranging from one thousand
to ﬁy thousand roubles. It was the post of secretary of the commiee of the
amalgamated agency of the southern railways, and of certain banking companies.
is position, like all such appointments, called for such immense energy and such
varied qualiﬁcations, that it was diﬃcult for them to be found united in any one
man. And since a man combining all the qualiﬁcations was not to be found, it
was at least beer that the post be ﬁlled by an honest than by a dishonest man.
And Stepan Arkadyevitch was not merely an honest man—unemphatically—in
the common acceptation of the words, he was an honest man—emphatically—in
that special sense which the word has in Moscow, when they talk of an "honest" politician, an "honest" writer, an "honest" newspaper, an "honest" institution,
an "honest" tendency, meaning not simply that the man or the institution is not
dishonest, but that they are capable on occasion of taking a line of their own in
opposition to the authorities.
Stepan Arkadyevitch moved in those circles in Moscow in which that expression had come into use, was regarded there as an honest man, and so had
more right to this appointment than others.
e appointment yielded an income of from seven to ten thousand a year,
and Oblonsky could ﬁll it without giving up his government position. It was in
the hands of two ministers, one lady, and two Jews, and all these people, though
the way had been paved already with them, Stepan Arkadyevitch had to see in
Petersburg. Besides this business, Stepan Arkadyevitch had promised his sister
Anna to obtain from Karenin a deﬁnite answer on the question of divorce. And
begging ﬁy roubles from Dolly, he set oﬀ for Petersburg.

dcxlv
Stepan Arkadyevitch sat in Karenin’s study listening to his report on the
causes of the unsatisfactory position of Russian ﬁnance, and only waiting for the
moment when he would ﬁnish to speak about his own business or about Anna.
"Yes, that’s very true," he said, when Alexey Alexandrovitch took oﬀ the
pince-nez, without which he could not read now, and looked inquiringly at his
former brother-in-law, "that’s very true in particular cases, but still the principle
of our day is freedom."
"Yes, but I lay down another principle, embracing the principle of freedom," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, with emphasis on the word "embracing," and
he put on his pince-nez again, so as to read the passage in which this statement
was made. And turning over the beautifully wrien, wide-margined manuscript,
Alexey Alexandrovitch read aloud over again the conclusive passage.
"I don’t advocate protection for the sake of private interests, but for the
public weal, and for the lower and upper classes equally," he said, looking over his
pince-nez at Oblonsky. "But they cannot grasp that, they are taken up now with
personal interests, and carried away by phrases."
Stepan Arkadyevitch knew that when Karenin began to talk of what they
were doing and thinking, the persons who would not accept his report and were
the cause of everything wrong in Russia, that it was coming near the end. And so
now he eagerly abandoned the principle of free-trade, and fully agreed. Alexey
Alexandrovitch paused, thoughtfully turning over the pages of his manuscript.
"Oh, by the way," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, "I wanted to ask you, some time
when you see Pomorsky, to drop him a hint that I should be very glad to get that
new appointment of secretary of the commiee of the amalgamated agency of the
southern railways and banking companies." Stepan Arkadyevitch was familiar by
now with the title of the post he coveted, and he brought it out rapidly without
mistake.
Alexey Alexandrovitch questioned him as to the duties of this new committee, and pondered. He was considering whether the new commiee would not
be acting in some way contrary to the views he had been advocating. But as the
inﬂuence of the new commiee was of a very complex nature, and his views were
of very wide application, he could not decide this straight oﬀ, and taking oﬀ his
pince-nez, he said:
"Of course, I can mention it to him; but what is your reason precisely for
wishing to obtain the appointment?"
"It’s a good salary, rising to nine thousand, and my means…"
"Nine thousand!" repeated Alexey Alexandrovitch, and he frowned. e
high ﬁgure of the salary made him reﬂect that on that side Stepan Arkadyevitch’s
proposed position ran counter to the main tendency of his own projects of reform,
which always leaned towards economy.

dcxlvi
"I consider, and I have embodied my views in a note on the subject, that in
our day these immense salaries are evidence of the unsound economic assiee of
our ﬁnances."
"But what’s to be done?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Suppose a bank director gets ten thousand—well, he’s worth it; or an engineer gets twenty thousand—aer all, it’s a growing thing, you know!"
"I assume that a salary is the price paid for a commodity, and it ought to
conform with the law of supply and demand. If the salary is ﬁxed without any
regard for that law, as, for instance, when I see two engineers leaving college
together, both equally well trained and eﬃcient, and one geing forty thousand
while the other is satisﬁed with two; or when I see lawyers and hussars, having
no special qualiﬁcations, appointed directors of banking companies with immense
salaries, I conclude that the salary is not ﬁxed in accordance with the law of supply
and demand, but simply through personal interest. And this is an abuse of great
gravity in itself, and one that reacts injuriously on the government service. I
consider…"
Stepan Arkadyevitch made haste to interrupt his brother-in-law.
"Yes; but you must agree that it’s a new institution of undoubted utility
that’s being started. Aer all, you know, it’s a growing thing! What they lay particular stress on is the thing being carried on honestly," said Stepan Arkadyevitch
with emphasis.
But the Moscow signiﬁcance of the word "honest" was lost on Alexey
Alexandrovitch.
"Honesty is only a negative qualiﬁcation," he said.
"Well, you’ll do me a great service, anyway," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, "by
puing in a word to Pomorsky—just in the way of conversation…."
"But I fancy it’s more in Volgarinov’s hands," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"Volgarinov has fully assented, as far as he’s concerned," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, turning red. Stepan Arkadyevitch reddened at the mention of that
name, because he had been that morning at the Jew Volgarinov’s, and the visit
had le an unpleasant recollection.
Stepan Arkadyevitch believed most positively that the commiee in which
he was trying to get an appointment was a new, genuine, and honest public body,
but that morning when Volgarinov had—intentionally, beyond a doubt—kept him
two hours waiting with other petitioners in his waiting room, he had suddenly
felt uneasy.
Whether he was uncomfortable that he, a descendant of Rurik, Prince
Oblonsky, had been kept for two hours waiting to see a Jew, or that for the ﬁrst
time in his life he was not following the example of his ancestors in serving the
government, but was turning oﬀ into a new career, anyway he was very uncom-

dcxlvii
fortable. During those two hours in Volgarinov’s waiting room Stepan Arkadyevitch, stepping jauntily about the room, pulling his whiskers, entering into conversation with the other petitioners, and inventing an epigram on his position,
assiduously concealed from others, and even from himself, the feeling he was
experiencing.
But all the time he was uncomfortable and angry, he could not have said
why—whether because he could not get his epigram just right, or from some
other reason. When at last Volgarinov had received him with exaggerated politeness and unmistakable triumph at his humiliation, and had all but refused the
favor asked of him, Stepan Arkadyevitch had made haste to forget it all as soon
as possible. And now, at the mere recollection, he blushed.

Chapter 
"Now there is something I want to talk about, and you know what it is. About
Anna," Stepan Arkadyevitch said, pausing for a brief space, and shaking oﬀ the
unpleasant impression.
As soon as Oblonsky uered Anna’s name, the face of Alexey Alexandrovitch was completely transformed; all the life was gone out of it, and it looked
weary and dead.
"What is it exactly that you want from me?" he said, moving in his chair
and snapping his pince-nez.
"A deﬁnite selement, Alexey Alexandrovitch, some selement of the position. I’m appealing to you" ("not as an injured husband," Stepan Arkadyevitch
was going to say, but afraid of wrecking his negotiation by this, he changed the
words) "not as a statesman" (which did not sound à propos), "but simply as a man,
and a good-hearted man and a Christian. You must have pity on her," he said.
"at is, in what way precisely?" Karenin said soly.
"Yes, pity on her. If you had seen her as I have!—I have been spending all
the winter with her—you would have pity on her. Her position is awful, simply
awful!"
"I had imagined," answered Alexey Alexandrovitch in a higher, almost shrill
voice, "that Anna Arkadyevna had everything she had desired for herself."
"Oh, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for heaven’s sake, don’t let us indulge in recriminations! What is past is past, and you know what she wants and is waiting
for—divorce."
"But I believe Anna Arkadyevna refuses a divorce, if I make it a condition to
leave me my son. I replied in that sense, and supposed that the maer was ended.
I consider it at an end," shrieked Alexey Alexandrovitch.

dcxlviii
"But, for heaven’s sake, don’t get hot!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, touching
his brother-in-law’s knee. "e maer is not ended. If you will allow me to recapitulate, it was like this: when you parted, you were as magnanimous as could
possibly be; you were ready to give her everything—freedom, divorce even. She
appreciated that. No, don’t think that. She did appreciate it—to such a degree
that at the ﬁrst moment, feeling how she had wronged you, she did not consider
and could not consider everything. She gave up everything. But experience, time,
have shown that her position is unbearable, impossible."
"e life of Anna Arkadyevna can have no interest for me," Alexey Alexandrovitch put in, liing his eyebrows.
"Allow me to disbelieve that," Stepan Arkadyevitch replied gently. "Her position is intolerable for her, and of no beneﬁt to anyone whatever. She has deserved it, you will say. She knows that and asks you for nothing; she says plainly
that she dare not ask you. But I, all of us, her relatives, all who love her, beg you,
entreat you. Why should she suﬀer? Who is any the beer for it?"
"Excuse me, you seem to put me in the position of the guilty party," observed
Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"Oh, no, oh, no, not at all! please understand me," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
touching his hand again, as though feeling sure this physical contact would soen
his brother-in-law. "All I say is this: her position is intolerable, and it might be
alleviated by you, and you will lose nothing by it. I will arrange it all for you, so
that you’ll not notice it. You did promise it, you know."
"e promise was given before. And I had supposed that the question of
my son had seled the maer. Besides, I had hoped that Anna Arkadyevna had
enough generosity…" Alexey Alexandrovitch articulated with diﬃculty, his lips
twitching and his face white.
"She leaves it all to your generosity. She begs, she implores one thing of
you—to extricate her from the impossible position in which she is placed. She
does not ask for her son now. Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are a good man. Put
yourself in her position for a minute. e question of divorce for her in her position is a question of life and death. If you had not promised it once, she would
have reconciled herself to her position, she would have gone on living in the country. But you promised it, and she wrote to you, and moved to Moscow. And here
she’s been for six months in Moscow, where every chance meeting cuts her to the
heart, every day expecting an answer. Why, it’s like keeping a condemned criminal for six months with the rope round his neck, promising him perhaps death,
perhaps mercy. Have pity on her, and I will undertake to arrange everything. Vos
scrupules…"
"I am not talking about that, about that…" Alexey Alexandrovitch interrupted with disgust. "But, perhaps, I promised what I had no right to promise."

dcxlix
"So you go back from your promise?"
"I have never refused to do all that is possible, but I want time to consider
how much of what I promised is possible."
"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch!" cried Oblonsky, jumping up, "I won’t believe
that! She’s unhappy as only an unhappy woman can be, and you cannot refuse in
such…"
"As much of what I promised as is possible. Vous professez d’être libre penseur.
But I as a believer cannot, in a maer of such gravity, act in opposition to the
Christian law."
"But in Christian societies and among us, as far as I’m aware, divorce is
allowed," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Divorce is sanctioned even by our church.
And we see…"
"It is allowed, but not in the sense…"
"Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are not like yourself," said Oblonsky, aer a
brief pause. "Wasn’t it you (and didn’t we all appreciate it in you?) who forgave
everything, and moved simply by Christian feeling was ready to make any sacriﬁce? You said yourself: if a man take thy coat, give him thy cloak also, and
now…"
"I beg," said Alexey Alexandrovitch shrilly, geing suddenly onto his feet,
his face white and his jaws twitching, "I beg you to drop this … to drop … this
subject!"
"Oh, no! Oh, forgive me, forgive me if I have wounded you," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, holding out his hand with a smile of embarrassment; "but like a
messenger I have simply performed the commission given me."
Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, pondered a lile, and said:
"I must think it over and seek for guidance. e day aer tomorrow I will
give you a ﬁnal answer," he said, aer considering a moment.

Chapter 
Stepan Arkadyevitch was about to go away when Korney came in to announce:
"Sergey Alexyevitch!"
"Who’s Sergey Alexyevitch?" Stepan Arkadyevitch was beginning, but he
remembered immediately.
"Ah, Seryozha!" he said aloud. "Sergey Alexyevitch! I thought it was the
director of a department. Anna asked me to see him too," he thought.
And he recalled the timid, piteous expression with which Anna had said to
him at parting: "Anyway, you will see him. Find out exactly where he is, who is
looking aer him. And Stiva … if it were possible! Could it be possible?" Stepan

dcl
Arkadyevitch knew what was meant by that "if it were possible,"—if it were possible to arrange the divorce so as to let her have her son…. Stepan Arkadyevitch
saw now that it was no good to dream of that, but still he was glad to see his
nephew.
Alexey Alexandrovitch reminded his brother-in-law that they never spoke
to the boy of his mother, and he begged him not to mention a single word about
her.
"He was very ill aer that interview with his mother, which we had not
foreseen," said Alexey Alexandrovitch. "Indeed, we feared for his life. But with
rational treatment, and sea-bathing in the summer, he regained his strength, and
now, by the doctor’s advice, I have let him go to school. And certainly the companionship of school has had a good eﬀect on him, and he is perfectly well, and
making good progress."
"What a ﬁne fellow he’s grown! He’s not Seryozha now, but quite fullﬂedged Sergey Alexyevitch!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling, as he looked at
the handsome, broad-shouldered lad in blue coat and long trousers, who walked
in alertly and conﬁdently. e boy looked healthy and good-humored. He bowed
to his uncle as to a stranger, but recognizing him, he blushed and turned hurriedly
away from him, as though oﬀended and irritated at something. e boy went up
to his father and handed him a note of the marks he had gained in school.
"Well, that’s very fair," said his father, "you can go."
"He’s thinner and taller, and has grown out of being a child into a boy; I like
that," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Do you remember me?"
e boy looked back quickly at his uncle.
"Yes, mon oncle," he answered, glancing at his father, and again he looked
downcast.
His uncle called him to him, and took his hand.
"Well, and how are you geing on?" he said, wanting to talk to him, and not
knowing what to say.
e boy, blushing and making no answer, cautiously drew his hand away.
As soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch let go his hand, he glanced doubtfully at his
father, and like a bird set free, he darted out of the room.
A year had passed since the last time Seryozha had seen his mother. Since
then he had heard nothing more of her. And in the course of that year he had gone
to school, and made friends among his schoolfellows. e dreams and memories of
his mother, which had made him ill aer seeing her, did not occupy his thoughts
now. When they came back to him, he studiously drove them away, regarding
them as shameful and girlish, below the dignity of a boy and a schoolboy. He
knew that his father and mother were separated by some quarrel, he knew that
he had to remain with his father, and he tried to get used to that idea.

dcli
He disliked seeing his uncle, so like his mother, for it called up those memories of which he was ashamed. He disliked it all the more as from some words
he had caught as he waited at the study door, and still more from the faces of his
father and uncle, he guessed that they must have been talking of his mother. And
to avoid condemning the father with whom he lived and on whom he was dependent, and, above all, to avoid giving way to sentimentality, which he considered
so degrading, Seryozha tried not to look at his uncle who had come to disturb his
peace of mind, and not to think of what he recalled to him.
But when Stepan Arkadyevitch, going out aer him, saw him on the stairs,
and calling to him, asked him how he spent his playtime at school, Seryozha talked
more freely to him away from his father’s presence.
"We have a railway now," he said in answer to his uncle’s question. "It’s like
this, do you see: two sit on a bench—they’re the passengers; and one stands up
straight on the bench. And all are harnessed to it by their arms or by their belts,
and they run through all the rooms—the doors are le open beforehand. Well,
and it’s prey hard work being the conductor!"
"at’s the one that stands?" Stepan Arkadyevitch inquired, smiling.
"Yes, you want pluck for it, and cleverness too, especially when they stop
all of a sudden, or someone falls down."
"Yes, that must be a serious maer," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, watching
with mournful interest the eager eyes, like his mother’s; not childish now—no
longer fully innocent. And though he had promised Alexey Alexandrovitch not
to speak of Anna, he could not restrain himself.
"Do you remember your mother?" he asked suddenly.
"No, I don’t," Seryozha said quickly. He blushed crimson, and his face
clouded over. And his uncle could get nothing more out of him. His tutor found
his pupil on the staircase half an hour later, and for a long while he could not
make out whether he was ill-tempered or crying.
"What is it? I expect you hurt yourself when you fell down?" said the tutor.
"I told you it was a dangerous game. And we shall have to speak to the director."
"If I had hurt myself, nobody should have found it out, that’s certain."
"Well, what is it, then?"
"Leave me alone! If I remember, or if I don’t remember?… what business is
it of his? Why should I remember? Leave me in peace!" he said, addressing not
his tutor, but the whole world.

Chapter 
Stepan Arkadyevitch, as usual, did not waste his time in Petersburg. In Petersburg,

dclii
besides business, his sister’s divorce, and his coveted appointment, he wanted, as
he always did, to freshen himself up, as he said, aer the mustiness of Moscow.
In spite of its cafés antants and its omnibuses, Moscow was yet a stagnant
bog. Stepan Arkadyevitch always felt it. Aer living for some time in Moscow,
especially in close relations with his family, he was conscious of a depression of
spirits. Aer being a long time in Moscow without a change, he reached a point
when he positively began to be worrying himself over his wife’s ill-humor and
reproaches, over his children’s health and education, and the pey details of his
oﬃcial work; even the fact of being in debt worried him. But he had only to go
and stay a lile while in Petersburg, in the circle there in which he moved, where
people lived—really lived—instead of vegetating as in Moscow, and all such ideas
vanished and melted away at once, like wax before the ﬁre. His wife?… Only that
day he had been talking to Prince Tchetchensky. Prince Tchetchensky had a wife
and family, grown-up pages in the corps, … and he had another illegitimate family
of children also. ough the ﬁrst family was very nice too, Prince Tchetchensky
felt happier in his second family; and he used to take his eldest son with him to
his second family, and told Stepan Arkadyevitch that he thought it good for his
son, enlarging his ideas. What would have been said to that in Moscow?
His children? In Petersburg children did not prevent their parents from
enjoying life. e children were brought up in schools, and there was no trace
of the wild idea that prevailed in Moscow, in Lvov’s household, for instance, that
all the luxuries of life were for the children, while the parents have nothing but
work and anxiety. Here people understood that a man is in duty bound to live for
himself, as every man of culture should live.
His oﬃcial duties? Oﬃcial work here was not the stiﬀ, hopeless drudgery
that it was in Moscow. Here there was some interest in oﬃcial life. A chance
meeting, a service rendered, a happy phrase, a knack of facetious mimicry, and
a man’s career might be made in a trice. So it had been with Bryantsev, whom
Stepan Arkadyevitch had met the previous day, and who was one of the highest
functionaries in government now. ere was some interest in oﬃcial work like
that.
e Petersburg aitude on pecuniary maers had an especially soothing
eﬀect on Stepan Arkadyevitch. Bartnyansky, who must spend at least ﬁy thousand to judge by the style he lived in, had made an interesting comment the day
before on that subject.
As they were talking before dinner, Stepan Arkadyevitch said to Bartnyansky:
"You’re friendly, I fancy, with Mordvinsky; you might do me a favor: say a
word to him, please, for me. ere’s an appointment I should like to get—secretary
of the agency…"

dcliii
"Oh, I shan’t remember all that, if you tell it to me…. But what possesses you
to have to do with railways and Jews?… Take it as you will, it’s a low business."
Stepan Arkadyevitch did not say to Bartnyansky that it was a "growing
thing"—Bartnyansky would not have understood that.
"I want the money, I’ve nothing to live on."
"You’re living, aren’t you?"
"Yes, but in debt."
"Are you, though? Heavily?" said Bartnyansky sympathetically.
"Very heavily: twenty thousand."
Bartnyansky broke into good-humored laughter.
"Oh, lucky fellow!" said he. "My debts mount up to a million and a half, and
I’ve nothing, and still I can live, as you see!"
And Stepan Arkadyevitch saw the correctness of this view not in words only
but in actual fact. Zhivahov owed three hundred thousand, and hadn’t a farthing
to bless himself with, and he lived, and in style too! Count Krivtsov was considered a hopeless case by everyone, and yet he kept two mistresses. Petrovsky had
run through ﬁve millions, and still lived in just the same style, and was even a
manager in the ﬁnancial department with a salary of twenty thousand. But besides this, Petersburg had physically an agreeable eﬀect on Stepan Arkadyevitch.
It made him younger. In Moscow he sometimes found a gray hair in his head,
dropped asleep aer dinner, stretched, walked slowly upstairs, breathing heavily, was bored by the society of young women, and did not dance at balls. In
Petersburg he always felt ten years younger.
His experience in Petersburg was exactly what had been described to him
on the previous day by Prince Pyotr Oblonsky, a man of sixty, who had just come
back from abroad:
"We don’t know the way to live here," said Pyotr Oblonsky. "I spent the
summer in Baden, and you wouldn’t believe it, I felt quite a young man. At a
glimpse of a prey woman, my thoughts…. One dines and drinks a glass of wine,
and feels strong and ready for anything. I came home to Russia—had to see my
wife, and, what’s more, go to my country place; and there, you’d hardly believe
it, in a fortnight I’d got into a dressing gown and given up dressing for dinner.
Needn’t say I had no thoughts le for prey women. I became quite an old gentleman. ere was nothing le for me but to think of my eternal salvation. I went
oﬀ to Paris—I was as right as could be at once."
Stepan Arkadyevitch felt exactly the diﬀerence that Pyotr Oblonsky described. In Moscow he degenerated so much that if he had had to be there for
long together, he might in good earnest have come to considering his salvation;
in Petersburg he felt himself a man of the world again.
Between Princess Betsy Tverskaya and Stepan Arkadyevitch there had long

dcliv
existed rather curious relations. Stepan Arkadyevitch always ﬂirted with her in
jest, and used to say to her, also in jest, the most unseemly things, knowing that
nothing delighted her so much. e day aer his conversation with Karenin,
Stepan Arkadyevitch went to see her, and felt so youthful that in this jesting ﬂirtation and nonsense he recklessly went so far that he did not know how to extricate
himself, as unluckily he was so far from being aracted by her that he thought
her positively disagreeable. What made it hard to change the conversation was
the fact that he was very aractive to her. So that he was considerably relieved
at the arrival of Princess Myakaya, which cut short their tête-à-tête.
"Ah, so you’re here!" said she when she saw him. "Well, and what news
of your poor sister? You needn’t look at me like that," she added. "Ever since
they’ve all turned against her, all those who’re a thousand times worse than she,
I’ve thought she did a very ﬁne thing. I can’t forgive Vronsky for not leing me
know when she was in Petersburg. I’d have gone to see her and gone about with
her everywhere. Please give her my love. Come, tell me about her."
"Yes, her position is very diﬃcult; she…" began Stepan Arkadyevitch, in the
simplicity of his heart accepting as sterling coin Princess Myakaya’s words "tell
me about her." Princess Myakaya interrupted him immediately, as she always did,
and began talking herself.
"She’s done what they all do, except me—only they hide it. But she wouldn’t
be deceitful, and she did a ﬁne thing. And she did beer still in throwing up that
crazy brother-in-law of yours. You must excuse me. Everybody used to say he
was so clever, so very clever; I was the only one that said he was a fool. Now that
he’s so thick with Lidia Ivanovna and Landau, they all say he’s crazy, and I should
prefer not to agree with everybody, but this time I can’t help it."
"Oh, do please explain," said Stepan Arkadyevitch; "what does it mean? Yesterday I was seeing him on my sister’s behalf, and I asked him to give me a ﬁnal
answer. He gave me no answer, and said he would think it over. But this morning, instead of an answer, I received an invitation from Countess Lidia Ivanovna
for this evening."
"Ah, so that’s it, that’s it!" said Princess Myakaya gleefully, "they’re going
to ask Landau what he’s to say."
"Ask Landau? What for? Who or what’s Landau?"
"What! you don’t know Jules Landau, le fameux Jules Landau, le clairvoyant?
He’s crazy too, but on him your sister’s fate depends. See what comes of living
in the provinces—you know nothing about anything. Landau, do you see, was a
commis in a shop in Paris, and he went to a doctor’s; and in the doctor’s waiting
room he fell asleep, and in his sleep he began giving advice to all the patients.
And wonderful advice it was! en the wife of Yury Meledinsky—you know, the
invalid?—heard of this Landau, and had him to see her husband. And he cured

dclv
her husband, though I can’t say that I see he did him much good, for he’s just as
feeble a creature as ever he was, but they believed in him, and took him along
with them and brought him to Russia. Here there’s been a general rush to him,
and he’s begun doctoring everyone. He cured Countess Bezzubova, and she took
such a fancy to him that she adopted him."
"Adopted him?"
"Yes, as her son. He’s not Landau any more now, but Count Bezzubov. at’s
neither here nor there, though; but Lidia—I’m very fond of her, but she has a screw
loose somewhere—has lost her heart to this Landau now, and nothing is seled
now in her house or Alexey Alexandrovitch’s without him, and so your sister’s
fate is now in the hands of Landau, alias Count Bezzubov."

Chapter 
Aer a capital dinner and a great deal of cognac drunk at Bartnyansky’s, Stepan
Arkadyevitch, only a lile later than the appointed time, went in to Countess Lidia
Ivanovna’s.
"Who else is with the countess?—a Frenchman?" Stepan Arkadyevitch asked
the hall porter, as he glanced at the familiar overcoat of Alexey Alexandrovitch
and a queer, rather artless-looking overcoat with clasps.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch Karenin and Count Bezzubov," the porter answered
severely.
"Princess Myakaya guessed right," thought Stepan Arkadyevitch, as he went
upstairs. "Curious! It would be quite as well, though, to get on friendly terms with
her. She has immense inﬂuence. If she would say a word to Pomorsky, the thing
would be a certainty."
It was still quite light out-of-doors, but in Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s lile
drawing room the blinds were drawn and the lamps lighted. At a round table
under a lamp sat the countess and Alexey Alexandrovitch, talking soly. A short,
thinnish man, very pale and handsome, with feminine hips and knock-kneed legs,
with ﬁne brilliant eyes and long hair lying on the collar of his coat, was standing
at the end of the room gazing at the portraits on the wall. Aer greeting the lady
of the house and Alexey Alexandrovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch could not resist
glancing once more at the unknown man.
"Monsieur Landau!" the countess addressed him with a soness and caution
that impressed Oblonsky. And she introduced them.
Landau looked round hurriedly, came up, and smiling, laid his moist, lifeless
hand in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s outstretched hand and immediately walked away
and fell to gazing at the portraits again. e countess and Alexey Alexandrovitch

dclvi
looked at each other signiﬁcantly.
"I am very glad to see you, particularly today," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
pointing Stepan Arkadyevitch to a seat beside Karenin.
"I introduced you to him as Landau," she said in a so voice, glancing at
the Frenchman and again immediately aer at Alexey Alexandrovitch, "but he is
really Count Bezzubov, as you’re probably aware. Only he does not like the title."
"Yes, I heard so," answered Stepan Arkadyevitch; "they say he completely
cured Countess Bezzubova."
"She was here today, poor thing!" the countess said, turning to Alexey
Alexandrovitch. "is separation is awful for her. It’s such a blow to her!"
"And he positively is going?" queried Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"Yes, he’s going to Paris. He heard a voice yesterday," said Countess Lidia
Ivanovna, looking at Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Ah, a voice!" repeated Oblonsky, feeling that he must be as circumspect as
he possibly could in this society, where something peculiar was going on, or was
to go on, to which he had not the key.
A moment’s silence followed, aer which Countess Lidia Ivanovna, as
though approaching the main topic of conversation, said with a ﬁne smile to
Oblonsky:
"I’ve known you for a long while, and am very glad to make a closer acquaintance with you. Les amis de nos amis sont nos amis. But to be a true friend,
one must enter into the spiritual state of one’s friend, and I fear that you are not
doing so in the case of Alexey Alexandrovitch. You understand what I mean?" she
said, liing her ﬁne pensive eyes.
"In part, countess, I understand the position of Alexey Alexandrovitch…"
said Oblonsky. Having no clear idea what they were talking about, he wanted to
conﬁne himself to generalities.
"e change is not in his external position," Countess Lidia Ivanovna said
sternly, following with eyes of love the ﬁgure of Alexey Alexandrovitch as he
got up and crossed over to Landau; "his heart is changed, a new heart has been
vouchsafed him, and I fear you don’t fully apprehend the change that has taken
place in him."
"Oh, well, in general outlines I can conceive the change. We have always
been friendly, and now…" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, responding with a sympathetic glance to the expression of the countess, and mentally balancing the question with which of the two ministers she was most intimate, so as to know about
which to ask her to speak for him.
"e change that has taken place in him cannot lessen his love for his neighbors; on the contrary, that change can only intensify love in his heart. But I am
afraid you do not understand me. Won’t you have some tea?" she said, with her

dclvii
eyes indicating the footman, who was handing round tea on a tray.
"Not quite, countess. Of course, his misfortune…"
"Yes, a misfortune which has proved the highest happiness, when his heart
was made new, was ﬁlled full of it," she said, gazing with eyes full of love at Stepan
Arkadyevitch.
"I do believe I might ask her to speak to both of them," thought Stepan
Arkadyevitch.
"Oh, of course, countess," he said; "but I imagine such changes are a maer
so private that no one, even the most intimate friend, would care to speak of them."
"On the contrary! We ought to speak freely and help one another."
"Yes, undoubtedly so, but there is such a diﬀerence of convictions, and besides…" said Oblonsky with a so smile.
"ere can be no diﬀerence where it is a question of holy truth."
"Oh, no, of course; but…" and Stepan Arkadyevitch paused in confusion. He
understood at last that they were talking of religion.
"I fancy he will fall asleep immediately," said Alexey Alexandrovitch in a
whisper full of meaning, going up to Lidia Ivanovna.
Stepan Arkadyevitch looked round. Landau was siing at the window, leaning on his elbow and the back of his chair, his head drooping. Noticing that all
eyes were turned on him he raised his head and smiled a smile of childlike artlessness.
"Don’t take any notice," said Lidia Ivanovna, and she lightly moved a chair
up for Alexey Alexandrovitch. "I have observed…" she was beginning, when a
footman came into the room with a leer. Lidia Ivanovna rapidly ran her eyes
over the note, and excusing herself, wrote an answer with extraordinary rapidity,
handed it to the man, and came back to the table. "I have observed," she went on,
"that Moscow people, especially the men, are more indiﬀerent to religion than
anyone."
"Oh, no, countess, I thought Moscow people had the reputation of being the
ﬁrmest in the faith," answered Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"But as far as I can make out, you are unfortunately one of the indiﬀerent
ones," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, turning to him with a weary smile.
"How anyone can be indiﬀerent!" said Lidia Ivanovna.
"I am not so much indiﬀerent on that subject as I am waiting in suspense,"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with his most deprecating smile. "I hardly think that
the time for such questions has come yet for me."
Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna looked at each other.
"We can never tell whether the time has come for us or not," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch severely. "We ought not to think whether we are ready or not
ready. God’s grace is not guided by human considerations: sometimes it comes

dclviii
not to those that strive for it, and comes to those that are unprepared, like Saul."
"No, I believe it won’t be just yet," said Lidia Ivanovna, who had been meanwhile watching the movements of the Frenchman. Landau got up and came to
them.
"Do you allow me to listen?" he asked.
"Oh, yes; I did not want to disturb you," said Lidia Ivanovna, gazing tenderly
at him; "sit here with us."
"One has only not to close one’s eyes to shut out the light," Alexey Alexandrovitch went on.
"Ah, if you knew the happiness we know, feeling His presence ever in our
hearts!" said Countess Lidia Ivanovna with a rapturous smile.
"But a man may feel himself unworthy sometimes to rise to that height," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, conscious of hypocrisy in admiing this religious height,
but at the same time unable to bring himself to acknowledge his free-thinking
views before a person who, by a single word to Pomorsky, might procure him the
coveted appointment.
"at is, you mean that sin keeps him back?" said Lidia Ivanovna. "But that
is a false idea. ere is no sin for believers, their sin has been atoned for. Pardon,"
she added, looking at the footman, who came in again with another leer. She
read it and gave a verbal answer: "Tomorrow at the Grand Duchess’s, say." "For
the believer sin is not," she went on.
"Yes, but faith without works is dead," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, recalling
the phrase from the catechism, and only by his smile clinging to his independence.
"ere you have it—from the epistle of St. James," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, addressing Lidia Ivanovna, with a certain reproachfulness in his tone.
It was unmistakably a subject they had discussed more than once before. "What
harm has been done by the false interpretation of that passage! Nothing holds
men back from belief like that misinterpretation. ‘I have not works, so I cannot
believe,’ though all the while that is not said. But the very opposite is said."
"Striving for God, saving the soul by fasting," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
with disgusted contempt, "those are the crude ideas of our monks…. Yet that is
nowhere said. It is far simpler and easier," she added, looking at Oblonsky with
the same encouraging smile with which at court she encouraged youthful maids
of honor, disconcerted by the new surroundings of the court.
"We are saved by Christ who suﬀered for us. We are saved by faith," Alexey
Alexandrovitch chimed in, with a glance of approval at her words.
"Vous comprenez l’anglais?" asked Lidia Ivanovna, and receiving a reply in
the aﬃrmative, she got up and began looking through a shelf of books.
"I want to read him ‘Safe and Happy,’ or ‘Under the Wing,’" she said, looking
inquiringly at Karenin. And ﬁnding the book, and siing down again in her place,

dclix
she opened it. "It’s very short. In it is described the way by which faith can be
reached, and the happiness, above all earthly bliss, with which it ﬁlls the soul. e
believer cannot be unhappy because he is not alone. But you will see." She was
just seling herself to read when the footman came in again. "Madame Borozdina?
Tell her, tomorrow at two o’clock. Yes," she said, puing her ﬁnger in the place
in the book, and gazing before her with her ﬁne pensive eyes, "that is how true
faith acts. You know Marie Sanina? You know about her trouble? She lost her
only child. She was in despair. And what happened? She found this comforter,
and she thanks God now for the death of her child. Such is the happiness faith
brings!"
"Oh, yes, that is most…" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, glad they were going to
read, and let him have a chance to collect his faculties. "No, I see I’d beer not
ask her about anything today," he thought. "If only I can get out of this without
puing my foot in it!"
"It will be dull for you," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, addressing Landau;
"you don’t know English, but it’s short."
"Oh, I shall understand," said Landau, with the same smile, and he closed his
eyes. Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna exchanged meaningful glances,
and the reading began.

Chapter 
Stepan Arkadyevitch felt completely nonplussed by the strange talk which he was
hearing for the ﬁrst time. e complexity of Petersburg, as a rule, had a stimulating eﬀect on him, rousing him out of his Moscow stagnation. But he liked these
complications, and understood them only in the circles he knew and was at home
in. In these unfamiliar surroundings he was puzzled and disconcerted, and could
not get his bearings. As he listened to Countess Lidia Ivanovna, aware of the beautiful, artless—or perhaps artful, he could not decide which—eyes of Landau ﬁxed
upon him, Stepan Arkadyevitch began to be conscious of a peculiar heaviness in
his head.
e most incongruous ideas were in confusion in his head. "Marie Sanina
is glad her child’s dead…. How good a smoke would be now!… To be saved, one
need only believe, and the monks don’t know how the thing’s to be done, but
Countess Lidia Ivanovna does know…. And why is my head so heavy? Is it the
cognac, or all this being so queer? Anyway, I fancy I’ve done nothing unsuitable
so far. But anyway, it won’t do to ask her now. ey say they make one say one’s
prayers. I only hope they won’t make me! at’ll be too imbecile. And what stuﬀ
it is she’s reading! but she has a good accent. Landau—Bezzubov—what’s he Bez-

dclx
zubov for?" All at once Stepan Arkadyevitch became aware that his lower jaw was
uncontrollably forming a yawn. He pulled his whiskers to cover the yawn, and
shook himself together. But soon aer he became aware that he was dropping
asleep and on the very point of snoring. He recovered himself at the very moment when the voice of Countess Lidia Ivanovna was saying "he’s asleep." Stepan
Arkadyevitch started with dismay, feeling guilty and caught. But he was reassured at once by seeing that the words "he’s asleep" referred not to him, but to
Landau. e Frenchman was asleep as well as Stepan Arkadyevitch. But Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s being asleep would have oﬀended them, as he thought (though
even this, he thought, might not be so, as everything seemed so queer), while Landau’s being asleep delighted them extremely, especially Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
"Mon ami," said Lidia Ivanovna, carefully holding the folds of her silk gown
so as not to rustle, and in her excitement calling Karenin not Alexey Alexandrovitch, but "mon ami," "donnez-lui la main. Vous voyez? Sh!" she hissed at the
footman as he came in again. "Not at home."
e Frenchman was asleep, or pretending to be asleep, with his head on
the back of his chair, and his moist hand, as it lay on his knee, made faint movements, as though trying to catch something. Alexey Alexandrovitch got up, tried
to move carefully, but stumbled against the table, went up and laid his hand in the
Frenchman’s hand. Stepan Arkadyevitch got up too, and opening his eyes wide,
trying to wake himself up if he were asleep, he looked ﬁrst at one and then at the
other. It was all real. Stepan Arkadyevitch felt that his head was geing worse
and worse.
"e la personne qui est arrivee la derniere, celle qui demande, qu’elle sorte!
’elle sorte!" articulated the Frenchman, without opening his eyes.
"Vous m’excuserez, mais vous voyez…. Revenez vers dix heures, encore mieux
demain."
"’elle sorte!" repeated the Frenchman impatiently.
"C’est moi, n’est-ce pas?" And receiving an answer in the aﬃrmative, Stepan
Arkadyevitch, forgeing the favor he had meant to ask of Lidia Ivanovna, and
forgeing his sister’s aﬀairs, caring for nothing, but ﬁlled with the sole desire to
get away as soon as possible, went out on tiptoe and ran out into the street as
though from a plague-stricken house. For a long while he chaed and joked with
his cab-driver, trying to recover his spirits.
At the French theater where he arrived for the last act, and aerwards at the
Tatar restaurant aer his champagne, Stepan Arkadyevitch felt a lile refreshed
in the atmosphere he was used to. But still he felt quite unlike himself all that
evening.
On geing home to Pyotr Oblonsky’s, where he was staying, Stepan
Arkadyevitch found a note from Betsy. She wrote to him that she was very anx-

dclxi
ious to ﬁnish their interrupted conversation, and begged him to come next day.
He had scarcely read this note, and frowned at its contents, when he heard below
the ponderous tramp of the servants, carrying something heavy.
Stepan Arkadyevitch went out to look. It was the rejuvenated Pyotr Oblonsky. He was so drunk that he could not walk upstairs; but he told them to set him
on his legs when he saw Stepan Arkadyevitch, and clinging to him, walked with
him into his room and there began telling him how he had spent the evening, and
fell asleep doing so.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was in very low spirits, which happened rarely with
him, and for a long while he could not go to sleep. Everything he could recall
to his mind, everything was disgusting; but most disgusting of all, as if it were
something shameful, was the memory of the evening he had spent at Countess
Lidia Ivanovna’s.
Next day he received from Alexey Alexandrovitch a ﬁnal answer, refusing
to grant Anna’s divorce, and he understood that this decision was based on what
the Frenchman had said in his real or pretended trance.

Chapter 
In order to carry through any undertaking in family life, there must necessarily
be either complete division between the husband and wife, or loving agreement.
When the relations of a couple are vacillating and neither one thing nor the other,
no sort of enterprise can be undertaken.
Many families remain for years in the same place, though both husband and
wife are sick of it, simply because there is neither complete division nor agreement
between them.
Both Vronsky and Anna felt life in Moscow insupportable in the heat and
dust, when the spring sunshine was followed by the glare of summer, and all the
trees in the boulevards had long since been in full leaf, and the leaves were covered
with dust. But they did not go back to Vozdvizhenskoe, as they had arranged to
do long before; they went on staying in Moscow, though they both loathed it,
because of late there had been no agreement between them.
e irritability that kept them apart had no external cause, and all eﬀorts to
come to an understanding intensiﬁed it, instead of removing it. It was an inner
irritation, grounded in her mind on the conviction that his love had grown less; in
his, on regret that he had put himself for her sake in a diﬃcult position, which she,
instead of lightening, made still more diﬃcult. Neither of them gave full uerance
to their sense of grievance, but they considered each other in the wrong, and tried
on every pretext to prove this to one another.

dclxii
In her eyes the whole of him, with all his habits, ideas, desires, with all
his spiritual and physical temperament, was one thing—love for women, and that
love, she felt, ought to be entirely concentrated on her alone. at love was less;
consequently, as she reasoned, he must have transferred part of his love to other
women or to another woman—and she was jealous. She was jealous not of any
particular woman but of the decrease of his love. Not having got an object for
her jealousy, she was on the lookout for it. At the slightest hint she transferred
her jealousy from one object to another. At one time she was jealous of those
low women with whom he might so easily renew his old bachelor ties; then she
was jealous of the society women he might meet; then she was jealous of the
imaginary girl whom he might want to marry, for whose sake he would break
with her. And this last form of jealousy tortured her most of all, especially as he
had unwarily told her, in a moment of frankness, that his mother knew him so
lile that she had had the audacity to try and persuade him to marry the young
Princess Sorokina.
And being jealous of him, Anna was indignant against him and found
grounds for indignation in everything. For everything that was diﬃcult in her
position she blamed him. e agonizing condition of suspense she had passed in
Moscow, the tardiness and indecision of Alexey Alexandrovitch, her solitude—she
put it all down to him. If he had loved her he would have seen all the bierness of
her position, and would have rescued her from it. For her being in Moscow and
not in the country, he was to blame too. He could not live buried in the country
as she would have liked to do. He must have society, and he had put her in this
awful position, the bierness of which he would not see. And again, it was his
fault that she was forever separated from her son.
Even the rare moments of tenderness that came from time to time did
not soothe her; in his tenderness now she saw a shade of complacency, of selfconﬁdence, which had not been of old, and which exasperated her.
It was dusk. Anna was alone, and waiting for him to come back from a
bachelor dinner. She walked up and down in his study (the room where the noise
from the street was least heard), and thought over every detail of their yesterday’s
quarrel. Going back from the well-remembered, oﬀensive words of the quarrel to
what had been the ground of it, she arrived at last at its origin. For a long while
she could hardly believe that their dissension had arisen from a conversation so
inoﬀensive, of so lile moment to either. But so it actually had been. It all arose
from his laughing at the girls’ high schools, declaring they were useless, while
she defended them. He had spoken slightingly of women’s education in general,
and had said that Hannah, Anna’s English protegée, had not the slightest need to
know anything of physics.
is irritated Anna. She saw in this a contemptuous reference to her oc-

dclxiii
cupations. And she bethought her of a phrase to pay him back for the pain he
had given her. "I don’t expect you to understand me, my feelings, as anyone who
loved me might, but simple delicacy I did expect," she said.
And he had actually ﬂushed with vexation, and had said something unpleasant. She could not recall her answer, but at that point, with an unmistakable desire
to wound her too, he had said:
"I feel no interest in your infatuation over this girl, that’s true, because I see
it’s unnatural."
e cruelty with which he shaered the world she had built up for herself
so laboriously to enable her to endure her hard life, the injustice with which he
had accused her of aﬀectation, of artiﬁciality, aroused her.
"I am very sorry that nothing but what’s coarse and material is comprehensible and natural to you," she said and walked out of the room.
When he had come in to her yesterday evening, they had not referred to
the quarrel, but both felt that the quarrel had been smoothed over, but was not at
an end.
Today he had not been at home all day, and she felt so lonely and wretched
in being on bad terms with him that she wanted to forget it all, to forgive him, and
be reconciled with him; she wanted to throw the blame on herself and to justify
him.
"I am myself to blame. I’m irritable, I’m insanely jealous. I will make it up
with him, and we’ll go away to the country; there I shall be more at peace."
"Unnatural!" She suddenly recalled the word that had stung her most of all,
not so much the word itself as the intent to wound her with which it was said. "I
know what he meant; he meant—unnatural, not loving my own daughter, to love
another person’s child. What does he know of love for children, of my love for
Seryozha, whom I’ve sacriﬁced for him? But that wish to wound me! No, he loves
another woman, it must be so."
And perceiving that, while trying to regain her peace of mind, she had gone
round the same circle that she had been round so oen before, and had come
back to her former state of exasperation, she was horriﬁed at herself. "Can it be
impossible? Can it be beyond me to control mysel?" she said to herself, and began
again from the beginning. "He’s truthful, he’s honest, he loves me. I love him, and
in a few days the divorce will come. What more do I want? I want peace of mind
and trust, and I will take the blame on myself. Yes, now when he comes in, I will
tell him I was wrong, though I was not wrong, and we will go away tomorrow."
And to escape thinking any more, and being overcome by irritability, she
rang, and ordered the boxes to be brought up for packing their things for the
country.
At ten o’clock Vronsky came in.

dclxiv

Chapter 
"Well, was it nice?" she asked, coming out to meet him with a penitent and meek
expression.
"Just as usual," he answered, seeing at a glance that she was in one of her
good moods. He was used by now to these transitions, and he was particularly
glad to see it today, as he was in a specially good humor himself.
"What do I see? Come, that’s good!" he said, pointing to the boxes in the
passage.
"Yes, we must go. I went out for a drive, and it was so ﬁne I longed to be in
the country. ere’s nothing to keep you, is there?"
"It’s the one thing I desire. I’ll be back directly, and we’ll talk it over; I only
want to change my coat. Order some tea."
And he went into his room.
ere was something mortifying in the way he had said "Come, that’s good,"
as one says to a child when it leaves oﬀ being naughty, and still more mortifying
was the contrast between her penitent and his self-conﬁdent tone; and for one
instant she felt the lust of strife rising up in her again, but making an eﬀort she
conquered it, and met Vronsky as good-humoredly as before.
When he came in she told him, partly repeating phrases she had prepared
beforehand, how she had spent the day, and her plans for going away.
"You know it came to me almost like an inspiration," she said. "Why wait
here for the divorce? Won’t it be just the same in the country? I can’t wait any
longer! I don’t want to go on hoping, I don’t want to hear anything about the
divorce. I have made up my mind it shall not have any more inﬂuence on my life.
Do you agree?"
"Oh, yes!" he said, glancing uneasily at her excited face.
"What did you do? Who was there?" she said, aer a pause.
Vronsky mentioned the names of the guests. "e dinner was ﬁrst rate, and
the boat race, and it was all pleasant enough, but in Moscow they can never do
anything without something ridicule. A lady of a sort appeared on the scene,
teacher of swimming to the een of Sweden, and gave us an exhibition of her
skill."
"How? did she swim?" asked Anna, frowning.
"In an absurd red costume de natation; she was old and hideous too. So when
shall we go?"
"What an absurd fancy! Why, did she swim in some special way, then?" said
Anna, not answering.
"ere was absolutely nothing in it. at’s just what I say, it was awfully
stupid. Well, then, when do you think of going?"

dclxv
Anna shook her head as though trying to drive away some unpleasant idea.
"When? Why, the sooner the beer! By tomorrow we shan’t be ready. e
day aer tomorrow."
"Yes … oh, no, wait a minute! e day aer tomorrow’s Sunday, I have
to be at maman’s," said Vronsky, embarrassed, because as soon as he uered his
mother’s name he was aware of her intent, suspicious eyes. His embarrassment
conﬁrmed her suspicion. She ﬂushed hotly and drew away from him. It was now
not the een of Sweden’s swimming-mistress who ﬁlled Anna’s imagination,
but the young Princess Sorokina. She was staying in a village near Moscow with
Countess Vronskaya.
"Can’t you go tomorrow?" she said.
"Well, no! e deeds and the money for the business I’m going there for I
can’t get by tomorrow," he answered.
"If so, we won’t go at all."
"But why so?"
"I shall not go later. Monday or never!"
"What for?" said Vronsky, as though in amazement. "Why, there’s no meaning in it!"
"ere’s no meaning in it to you, because you care nothing for me. You
don’t care to understand my life. e one thing that I cared for here was Hannah.
You say it’s aﬀectation. Why, you said yesterday that I don’t love my daughter,
that I love this English girl, that it’s unnatural. I should like to know what life
there is for me that could be natural!"
For an instant she had a clear vision of what she was doing, and was horriﬁed at how she had fallen away from her resolution. But even though she knew
it was her own ruin, she could not restrain herself, could not keep herself from
proving to him that he was wrong, could not give way to him.
"I never said that; I said I did not sympathize with this sudden passion."
"How is it, though you boast of your straightforwardness, you don’t tell the
truth?"
"I never boast, and I never tell lies," he said slowly, restraining his rising
anger. "It’s a great pity if you can’t respect…"
"Respect was invented to cover the empty place where love should be. And
if you don’t love me any more, it would be beer and more honest to say so."
"No, this is becoming unbearable!" cried Vronsky, geing up from his chair;
and stopping short, facing her, he said, speaking deliberately: "What do you try
my patience for?" looking as though he might have said much more, but was
restraining himself. "It has limits."
"What do you mean by that?" she cried, looking with terror at the undisguised hatred in his whole face, and especially in his cruel, menacing eyes.

dclxvi
"I mean to say…" he was beginning, but he checked himself. "I must ask what
it is you want of me?"
"What can I want? All I can want is that you should not desert me, as you
think of doing," she said, understanding all he had not uered. "But that I don’t
want; that’s secondary. I want love, and there is none. So then all is over."
She turned towards the door.
"Stop! sto-op!" said Vronsky, with no change in the gloomy lines of his
brows, though he held her by the hand. "What is it all about? I said that we must
put oﬀ going for three days, and on that you told me I was lying, that I was not
an honorable man."
"Yes, and I repeat that the man who reproaches me with having sacriﬁced
everything for me," she said, recalling the words of a still earlier quarrel, "that he’s
worse than a dishonorable man—he’s a heartless man."
"Oh, there are limits to endurance!" he cried, and hastily let go her hand.
"He hates me, that’s clear," she thought, and in silence, without looking
round, she walked with faltering steps out of the room. "He loves another woman,
that’s even clearer," she said to herself as she went into her own room. "I want
love, and there is none. So, then, all is over." She repeated the words she had said,
"and it must be ended."
"But how?" she asked herself, and she sat down in a low chair before the
looking glass.
oughts of where she would go now, whether to the aunt who had brought
her up, to Dolly, or simply alone abroad, and of what he was doing now alone in
his study; whether this was the ﬁnal quarrel, or whether reconciliation were still
possible; and of what all her old friends at Petersburg would say of her now; and of
how Alexey Alexandrovitch would look at it, and many other ideas of what would
happen now aer this rupture, came into her head; but she did not give herself up
to them with all her heart. At the boom of her heart was some obscure idea that
alone interested her, but she could not get clear sight of it. inking once more of
Alexey Alexandrovitch, she recalled the time of her illness aer her conﬁnement,
and the feeling which never le her at that time. "Why didn’t I die?" and the
words and the feeling of that time came back to her. And all at once she knew
what was in her soul. Yes, it was that idea which alone solved all. "Yes, to die!…
And the shame and disgrace of Alexey Alexandrovitch and of Seryozha, and my
awful shame, it will all be saved by death. To die! and he will feel remorse; will
be sorry; will love me; he will suﬀer on my account." With the trace of a smile of
commiseration for herself she sat down in the armchair, taking oﬀ and puing on
the rings on her le hand, vividly picturing from diﬀerent sides his feelings aer
her death.
Approaching footsteps—his steps—distracted her aention. As though ab-

dclxvii
sorbed in the arrangement of her rings, she did not even turn to him.
He went up to her, and taking her by the hand, said soly:
"Anna, we’ll go the day aer tomorrow, if you like. I agree to everything."
She did not speak.
"What is it?" he urged.
"You know," she said, and at the same instant, unable to restrain herself any
longer, she burst into sobs.
"Cast me oﬀ!" she articulated between her sobs. "I’ll go away tomorrow …
I’ll do more. What am I? An immoral woman! A stone round your neck. I don’t
want to make you wretched, I don’t want to! I’ll set you free. You don’t love me;
you love someone else!"
Vronsky besought her to be calm, and declared that there was no trace of
foundation for her jealousy; that he had never ceased, and never would cease, to
love her; that he loved her more than ever.
"Anna, why distress yourself and me so?" he said to her, kissing her hands.
ere was tenderness now in his face, and she fancied she caught the sound of
tears in his voice, and she felt them wet on her hand. And instantly Anna’s despairing jealousy changed to a despairing passion of tenderness. She put her arms
round him, and covered with kisses his head, his neck, his hands.

Chapter 
Feeling that the reconciliation was complete, Anna set eagerly to work in the
morning preparing for their departure. ough it was not seled whether they
should go on Monday or Tuesday, as they had each given way to the other, Anna
packed busily, feeling absolutely indiﬀerent whether they went a day earlier or
later. She was standing in her room over an open box, taking things out of it,
when he came in to see her earlier than usual, dressed to go out.
"I’m going oﬀ at once to see maman; she can send me the money by Yegorov.
And I shall be ready to go tomorrow," he said.
ough she was in such a good mood, the thought of his visit to his mother’s
gave her a pang.
"No, I shan’t be ready by then myself," she said; and at once reﬂected, "so
then it was possible to arrange to do as I wished." "No, do as you meant to do. Go
into the dining room, I’m coming directly. It’s only to turn out those things that
aren’t wanted," she said, puing something more on the heap of frippery that lay
in Annushka’s arms.
Vronsky was eating his beefsteak when she came into the dining-room.
"You wouldn’t believe how distasteful these rooms have become to me," she

dclxviii
said, siing down beside him to her coﬀee. "ere’s nothing more awful than
these ambres garnies. ere’s no individuality in them, no soul. ese clocks,
and curtains, and, worst of all, the wallpapers—they’re a nightmare. I think of
Vozdvizhenskoe as the promised land. You’re not sending the horses oﬀ yet?"
"No, they will come aer us. Where are you going to?"
"I wanted to go to Wilson’s to take some dresses to her. So it’s really to be
tomorrow?" she said in a cheerful voice; but suddenly her face changed.
Vronsky’s valet came in to ask him to sign a receipt for a telegram from
Petersburg. ere was nothing out of the way in Vronsky’s geing a telegram,
but he said, as though anxious to conceal something from her, that the receipt was
in his study, and he turned hurriedly to her.
"By tomorrow, without fail, I will ﬁnish it all."
"From whom is the telegram?" she asked, not hearing him.
"From Stiva," he answered reluctantly.
"Why didn’t you show it to me? What secret can there be between Stiva
and me?"
Vronsky called the valet back, and told him to bring the telegram.
"I didn’t want to show it to you, because Stiva has such a passion for telegraphing: why telegraph when nothing is seled?"
"About the divorce?"
"Yes; but he says he has not been able to come at anything yet. He has
promised a decisive answer in a day or two. But here it is; read it."
With trembling hands Anna took the telegram, and read what Vronsky had
told her. At the end was added: "Lile hope; but I will do everything possible and
impossible."
"I said yesterday that it’s absolutely nothing to me when I get, or whether
I never get, a divorce," she said, ﬂushing crimson. "ere was not the slightest
necessity to hide it from me." "So he may hide and does hide his correspondence
with women from me," she thought.
"Yashvin meant to come this morning with Voytov," said Vronsky; "I believe
he’s won from Pyevtsov all and more than he can pay, about sixty thousand."
"No," she said, irritated by his so obviously showing by this change of subject
that he was irritated, "why did you suppose that this news would aﬀect me so, that
you must even try to hide it? I said I don’t want to consider it, and I should have
liked you to care as lile about it as I do."
"I care about it because I like deﬁniteness," he said.
"Deﬁniteness is not in the form but the love," she said, more and more irritated, not by his words, but by the tone of cool composure in which he spoke.
"What do you want it for?"
"My God! love again," he thought, frowning.

dclxix
"Oh, you know what for; for your sake and your children’s in the future."
"ere won’t be children in the future."
"at’s a great pity," he said.
"You want it for the children’s sake, but you don’t think of me?" she said,
quite forgeing or not having heard that he had said, "for your sake and the children’s."
e question of the possibility of having children had long been a subject
of dispute and irritation to her. His desire to have children she interpreted as a
proof he did not prize her beauty.
"Oh, I said: for your sake. Above all for your sake," he repeated, frowning
as though in pain, "because I am certain that the greater part of your irritability
comes from the indeﬁniteness of the position."
"Yes, now he has laid aside all pretense, and all his cold hatred for me is
apparent," she thought, not hearing his words, but watching with terror the cold,
cruel judge who looked mocking her out of his eyes.
"e cause is not that," she said, "and, indeed, I don’t see how the cause of
my irritability, as you call it, can be that I am completely in your power. What
indeﬁniteness is there in the position? on the contrary…"
"I am very sorry that you don’t care to understand," he interrupted, obstinately anxious to give uerance to his thought. "e indeﬁniteness consists in
your imagining that I am free."
"On that score you can set your mind quite at rest," she said, and turning
away from him, she began drinking her coﬀee.
She lied her cup, with her lile ﬁnger held apart, and put it to her lips.
Aer drinking a few sips she glanced at him, and by his expression, she saw clearly
that he was repelled by her hand, and her gesture, and the sound made by her lips.
"I don’t care in the least what your mother thinks, and what match she wants
to make for you," she said, puing the cup down with a shaking hand.
"But we are not talking about that."
"Yes, that’s just what we are talking about. And let me tell you that a heartless woman, whether she’s old or not old, your mother or anyone else, is of no
consequence to me, and I would not consent to know her."
"Anna, I beg you not to speak disrespectfully of my mother."
"A woman whose heart does not tell her where her son’s happiness and
honor lie has no heart."
"I repeat my request that you will not speak disrespectfully of my mother,
whom I respect," he said, raising his voice and looking sternly at her.
She did not answer. Looking intently at him, at his face, his hands, she
recalled all the details of their reconciliation the previous day, and his passionate
caresses. "ere, just such caresses he has lavished, and will lavish, and longs to

dclxx
lavish on other women!" she thought.
"You don’t love your mother. at’s all talk, and talk, and talk!" she said,
looking at him with hatred in her eyes.
"Even if so, you must…"
"Must decide, and I have decided," she said, and she would have gone away,
but at that moment Yashvin walked into the room. Anna greeted him and remained.
Why, when there was a tempest in her soul, and she felt she was standing at
a turning point in her life, which might have fearful consequences—why, at that
minute, she had to keep up appearances before an outsider, who sooner or later
must know it all—she did not know. But at once quelling the storm within her,
she sat down and began talking to their guest.
"Well, how are you geing on? Has your debt been paid you?" she asked
Yashvin.
"Oh, prey fair; I fancy I shan’t get it all, but I shall get a good half. And
when are you o?" said Yashvin, looking at Vronsky, and unmistakably guessing
at a quarrel.
"e day aer tomorrow, I think," said Vronsky.
"You’ve been meaning to go so long, though."
"But now it’s quite decided," said Anna, looking Vronsky straight in the face
with a look which told him not to dream of the possibility of reconciliation.
"Don’t you feel sorry for that unlucky Pyevtsov?" she went on, talking to
Yashvin.
"I’ve never asked myself the question, Anna Arkadyevna, whether I’m sorry
for him or not. You see, all my fortune’s here"—he touched his breast pocket—"and
just now I’m a wealthy man. But today I’m going to the club, and I may come out
a beggar. You see, whoever sits down to play with me—he wants to leave me
without a shirt to my back, and so do I him. And so we ﬁght it out, and that’s the
pleasure of it."
"Well, but suppose you were married," said Anna, "how would it be for your
wife?"
Yashvin laughed.
"at’s why I’m not married, and never mean to be."
"And Helsingfors?" said Vronsky, entering into the conversation and glancing at Anna’s smiling face. Meeting his eyes, Anna’s face instantly took a coldly
severe expression as though she were saying to him: "It’s not forgoen. It’s all
the same."
"Were you really in love?" she said to Yashvin.
"Oh heavens! ever so many times! But you see, some men can play but
only so that they can always lay down their cards when the hour of a rendezvous

dclxxi
comes, while I can take up love, but only so as not to be late for my cards in the
evening. at’s how I manage things."
"No, I didn’t mean that, but the real thing." She would have said Helsingfors,
but would not repeat the word used by Vronsky.
Voytov, who was buying the horse, came in. Anna got up and went out of
the room.
Before leaving the house, Vronsky went into her room. She would have
pretended to be looking for something on the table, but ashamed of making a
pretense, she looked straight in his face with cold eyes.
"What do you want?" she asked in French.
"To get the guarantee for Gambea, I’ve sold him," he said, in a tone which
said more clearly than words, "I’ve no time for discussing things, and it would
lead to nothing."
"I’m not to blame in any way," he thought. "If she will punish herself, tant
pis pour elle." But as he was going he fancied that she said something, and his heart
suddenly ached with pity for her.
"Eh, Anna?" he queried.
"I said nothing," she answered just as coldly and calmly.
"Oh, nothing, tant pis then," he thought, feeling cold again, and he turned
and went out. As he was going out he caught a glimpse in the looking glass of
her face, white, with quivering lips. He even wanted to stop and to say some
comforting word to her, but his legs carried him out of the room before he could
think what to say. e whole of that day he spent away from home, and when
he came in late in the evening the maid told him that Anna Arkadyevna had a
headache and begged him not to go in to her.

Chapter 
Never before had a day been passed in quarrel. Today was the ﬁrst time. And this
was not a quarrel. It was the open acknowledgment of complete coldness. Was it
possible to glance at her as he had glanced when he came into the room for the
guarantee?—to look at her, see her heart was breaking with despair, and go out
without a word with that face of callous composure? He was not merely cold to
her, he hated her because he loved another woman—that was clear.
And remembering all the cruel words he had said, Anna supplied, too, the
words that he had unmistakably wished to say and could have said to her, and she
grew more and more exasperated.
"I won’t prevent you," he might say. "You can go where you like. You were
unwilling to be divorced from your husband, no doubt so that you might go back

dclxxii
to him. Go back to him. If you want money, I’ll give it to you. How many roubles
do you want?"
All the most cruel words that a brutal man could say, he said to her in her
imagination, and she could not forgive him for them, as though he had actually
said them.
"But didn’t he only yesterday swear he loved me, he, a truthful and sincere
man? Haven’t I despaired for nothing many times already?" she said to herself
aerwards.
All that day, except for the visit to Wilson’s, which occupied two hours,
Anna spent in doubts whether everything were over or whether there were still
hope of reconciliation, whether she should go away at once or see him once more.
She was expecting him the whole day, and in the evening, as she went to her own
room, leaving a message for him that her head ached, she said to herself, "If he
comes in spite of what the maid says, it means that he loves me still. If not, it
means that all is over, and then I will decide what I’m to do!…"
In the evening she heard the rumbling of his carriage stop at the entrance,
his ring, his steps and his conversation with the servant; he believed what was told
him, did not care to ﬁnd out more, and went to his own room. So then everything
was over.
And death rose clearly and vividly before her mind as the sole means of
bringing back love for her in his heart, of punishing him and of gaining the victory
in that strife which the evil spirit in possession of her heart was waging with him.
Now nothing maered: going or not going to Vozdvizhenskoe, geing or
not geing a divorce from her husband—all that did not maer. e one thing
that maered was punishing him. When she poured herself out her usual dose
of opium, and thought that she had only to drink oﬀ the whole bole to die, it
seemed to her so simple and easy, that she began musing with enjoyment on how
he would suﬀer, and repent and love her memory when it would be too late. She
lay in bed with open eyes, by the light of a single burned-down candle, gazing
at the carved cornice of the ceiling and at the shadow of the screen that covered
part of it, while she vividly pictured to herself how he would feel when she would
be no more, when she would be only a memory to him. "How could I say such
cruel things to her?" he would say. "How could I go out of the room without
saying anything to her? But now she is no more. She has gone away from us
forever. She is…." Suddenly the shadow of the screen wavered, pounced on the
whole cornice, the whole ceiling; other shadows from the other side swooped
to meet it, for an instant the shadows ﬂied back, but then with fresh swiness
they darted forward, wavered, commingled, and all was darkness. "Death!" she
thought. And such horror came upon her that for a long while she could not
realize where she was, and for a long while her trembling hands could not ﬁnd

dclxxiii
the matches and light another candle, instead of the one that had burned down
and gone out. "No, anything—only to live! Why, I love him! Why, he loves me!
is has been before and will pass," she said, feeling that tears of joy at the return
to life were trickling down her cheeks. And to escape from her panic she went
hurriedly to his room.
He was asleep there, and sleeping soundly. She went up to him, and holding the light above his face, she gazed a long while at him. Now when he was
asleep, she loved him so that at the sight of him she could not keep back tears of
tenderness. But she knew that if he waked up he would look at her with cold eyes,
convinced that he was right, and that before telling him of her love, she would
have to prove to him that he had been wrong in his treatment of her. Without
waking him, she went back, and aer a second dose of opium she fell towards
morning into a heavy, incomplete sleep, during which she never quite lost consciousness.
In the morning she was waked by a horrible nightmare, which had recurred
several times in her dreams, even before her connection with Vronsky. A lile
old man with unkempt beard was doing something bent down over some iron,
muering meaningless French words, and she, as she always did in this nightmare
(it was what made the horror of it), felt that this peasant was taking no notice of
her, but was doing something horrible with the iron—over her. And she waked
up in a cold sweat.
When she got up, the previous day came back to her as though veiled in
mist.
"ere was a quarrel. Just what has happened several times. I said I had a
headache, and he did not come in to see me. Tomorrow we’re going away; I must
see him and get ready for the journey," she said to herself. And learning that he
was in his study, she went down to him. As she passed through the drawing room
she heard a carriage stop at the entrance, and looking out of the window she saw
the carriage, from which a young girl in a lilac hat was leaning out giving some
direction to the footman ringing the bell. Aer a parley in the hall, someone came
upstairs, and Vronsky’s steps could be heard passing the drawing room. He went
rapidly downstairs. Anna went again to the window. She saw him come out onto
the steps without his hat and go up to the carriage. e young girl in the lilac hat
handed him a parcel. Vronsky, smiling, said something to her. e carriage drove
away, he ran rapidly upstairs again.
e mists that had shrouded everything in her soul parted suddenly. e
feelings of yesterday pierced the sick heart with a fresh pang. She could not
understand now how she could have lowered herself by spending a whole day
with him in his house. She went into his room to announce her determination.
"at was Madame Sorokina and her daughter. ey came and brought me

dclxxiv
the money and the deeds from maman. I couldn’t get them yesterday. How is your
head, beer?" he said quietly, not wishing to see and to understand the gloomy
and solemn expression of her face.
She looked silently, intently at him, standing in the middle of the room. He
glanced at her, frowned for a moment, and went on reading a leer. She turned,
and went deliberately out of the room. He still might have turned her back, but
she had reached the door, he was still silent, and the only sound audible was the
rustling of the note paper as he turned it.
"Oh, by the way," he said at the very moment she was in the doorway, "we’re
going tomorrow for certain, aren’t we?"
"You, but not I," she said, turning round to him.
"Anna, we can’t go on like this…"
"You, but not I," she repeated.
"is is geing unbearable!"
"You … you will be sorry for this," she said, and went out.
Frightened by the desperate expression with which these words were uttered, he jumped up and would have run aer her, but on second thoughts he
sat down and scowled, seing his teeth. is vulgar—as he thought it—threat of
something vague exasperated him. "I’ve tried everything," he thought; "the only
thing le is not to pay aention," and he began to get ready to drive into town,
and again to his mother’s to get her signature to the deeds.
She heard the sound of his steps about the study and the dining room. At
the drawing room he stood still. But he did not turn in to see her, he merely gave
an order that the horse should be given to Voytov if he came while he was away.
en she heard the carriage brought round, the door opened, and he came out
again. But he went back into the porch again, and someone was running upstairs.
It was the valet running up for his gloves that had been forgoen. She went to the
window and saw him take the gloves without looking, and touching the coachman
on the back he said something to him. en without looking up at the window
he seled himself in his usual aitude in the carriage, with his legs crossed, and
drawing on his gloves he vanished round the corner.

Chapter 
"He has gone! It is over!" Anna said to herself, standing at the window; and in
answer to this statement the impression of the darkness when the candle had
ﬂickered out, and of her fearful dream mingling into one, ﬁlled her heart with
cold terror.
"No, that cannot be!" she cried, and crossing the room she rang the bell. She

dclxxv
was so afraid now of being alone, that without waiting for the servant to come
in, she went out to meet him.
"Inquire where the count has gone," she said. e servant answered that the
count had gone to the stable.
"His honor le word that if you cared to drive out, the carriage would be
back immediately."
"Very good. Wait a minute. I’ll write a note at once. Send Mihail with the
note to the stables. Make haste."
She sat down and wrote:
"I was wrong. Come back home; I must explain. For God’s sake come! I’m
afraid."
She sealed it up and gave it to the servant.
She was afraid of being le alone now; she followed the servant out of the
room, and went to the nursery.
"Why, this isn’t it, this isn’t he! Where are his blue eyes, his sweet, shy
smile?" was her ﬁrst thought when she saw her chubby, rosy lile girl with her
black, curly hair instead of Seryozha, whom in the tangle of her ideas she had
expected to see in the nursery. e lile girl siing at the table was obstinately
and violently baering on it with a cork, and staring aimlessly at her mother with
her pitch-black eyes. Answering the English nurse that she was quite well, and
that she was going to the country tomorrow, Anna sat down by the lile girl and
began spinning the cork to show her. But the child’s loud, ringing laugh, and the
motion of her eyebrows, recalled Vronsky so vividly that she got up hurriedly,
restraining her sobs, and went away. "Can it be all over? No, it cannot be!" she
thought. "He will come back. But how can he explain that smile, that excitement
aer he had been talking to her? But even if he doesn’t explain, I will believe. If
I don’t believe, there’s only one thing le for me, and I can’t."
She looked at her watch. Twenty minutes had passed. "By now he has
received the note and is coming back. Not long, ten minutes more…. But what if
he doesn’t come? No, that cannot be. He mustn’t see me with tear-stained eyes.
I’ll go and wash. Yes, yes; did I do my hair or not?" she asked herself. And she
could not remember. She felt her head with her hand. "Yes, my hair has been
done, but when I did it I can’t in the least remember." She could not believe the
evidence of her hand, and went up to the pier glass to see whether she really had
done her hair. She certainly had, but she could not think when she had done it.
"Who’s that?" she thought, looking in the looking glass at the swollen face with
strangely gliering eyes, that looked in a scared way at her. "Why, it’s I!" she
suddenly understood, and looking round, she seemed all at once to feel his kisses
on her, and twitched her shoulders, shuddering. en she lied her hand to her
lips and kissed it.

dclxxvi
"What is it? Why, I’m going out of my mind!" and she went into her bedroom, where Annushka was tidying the room.
"Annushka," she said, coming to a standstill before her, and she stared at the
maid, not knowing what to say to her.
"You meant to go and see Darya Alexandrovna," said the girl, as though she
understood.
"Darya Alexandrovna? Yes, I’ll go."
"Fieen minutes there, ﬁeen minutes back. He’s coming, he’ll be here
soon." She took out her watch and looked at it. "But how could he go away, leaving me in such a state? How can he live, without making it up with me?" She went
to the window and began looking into the street. Judging by the time, he might
be back now. But her calculations might be wrong, and she began once more to
recall when he had started and to count the minutes.
At the moment when she had moved away to the big clock to compare it
with her watch, someone drove up. Glancing out of the window, she saw his
carriage. But no one came upstairs, and voices could be heard below. It was the
messenger who had come back in the carriage. She went down to him.
"We didn’t catch the count. e count had driven oﬀ on the lower city road."
"What do you say? What!…" she said to the rosy, good-humored Mihail, as
he handed her back her note.
"Why, then, he has never received it!" she thought.
"Go with this note to Countess Vronskaya’s place, you know? and bring an
answer back immediately," she said to the messenger.
"And I, what am I going to do?" she thought. "Yes, I’m going to Dolly’s,
that’s true or else I shall go out of my mind. Yes, and I can telegraph, too." And
she wrote a telegram. "I absolutely must talk to you; come at once." Aer sending
oﬀ the telegram, she went to dress. When she was dressed and in her hat, she
glanced again into the eyes of the plump, comfortable-looking Annushka. ere
was unmistakable sympathy in those good-natured lile gray eyes.
"Annushka, dear, what am I to do?" said Anna, sobbing and sinking helplessly into a chair.
"Why fret yourself so, Anna Arkadyevna? Why, there’s nothing out of the
way. You drive out a lile, and it’ll cheer you up," said the maid.
"Yes, I’m going," said Anna, rousing herself and geing up. "And if there’s
a telegram while I’m away, send it on to Darya Alexandrovna’s … but no, I shall
be back myself."
"Yes, I mustn’t think, I must do something, drive somewhere, and most of
all, get out of this house," she said, feeling with terror the strange turmoil going
on in her own heart, and she made haste to go out and get into the carriage.
"Where to?" asked Pyotr before geing onto the box.

dclxxvii
"To Znamenka, the Oblonskys’."

Chapter 
It was bright and sunny. A ﬁne rain had been falling all the morning, and now
it had not long cleared up. e iron roofs, the ﬂags of the roads, the ﬂints of the
pavements, the wheels and leather, the brass and the tinplate of the carriages—all
glistened brightly in the May sunshine. It was three o’clock, and the very liveliest
time in the streets.
As she sat in a corner of the comfortable carriage, that hardly swayed on its
supple springs, while the grays troed swily, in the midst of the unceasing rale
of wheels and the changing impressions in the pure air, Anna ran over the events
of the last days, and she saw her position quite diﬀerently from how it had seemed
at home. Now the thought of death seemed no longer so terrible and so clear to
her, and death itself no longer seemed so inevitable. Now she blamed herself for
the humiliation to which she had lowered herself. "I entreat him to forgive me. I
have given in to him. I have owned myself in fault. What for? Can’t I live without
him?" And leaving unanswered the question how she was going to live without
him, she fell to reading the signs on the shops. "Oﬃce and warehouse. Dental
surgeon. Yes, I’ll tell Dolly all about it. She doesn’t like Vronsky. I shall be sick
and ashamed, but I’ll tell her. She loves me, and I’ll follow her advice. I won’t
give in to him; I won’t let him train me as he pleases. Filippov, bun shop. ey
say they send their dough to Petersburg. e Moscow water is so good for it. Ah,
the springs at Mitishtchen, and the pancakes!"
And she remembered how, long, long ago, when she was a girl of seventeen,
she had gone with her aunt to Troitsa. "Riding, too. Was that really me, with red
hands? How much that seemed to me then splendid and out of reach has become
worthless, while what I had then has gone out of my reach forever! Could I ever
have believed then that I could come to such humiliation? How conceited and
self-satisﬁed he will be when he gets my note! But I will show him…. How horrid
that paint smells! Why is it they’re always painting and building? Modes et robes,"
she read. A man bowed to her. It was Annushka’s husband. "Our parasites"; she
remembered how Vronsky had said that. "Our? Why our? What’s so awful is
that one can’t tear up the past by its roots. One can’t tear it out, but one can hide
one’s memory of it. And I’ll hide it." And then she thought of her past with Alexey
Alexandrovitch, of how she had bloed the memory of it out of her life. "Dolly
will think I’m leaving my second husband, and so I certainly must be in the wrong.
As if I cared to be right! I can’t help it!" she said, and she wanted to cry. But at
once she fell to wondering what those two girls could be smiling about. "Love,

dclxxviii
most likely. ey don’t know how dreary it is, how low…. e boulevard and
the children. ree boys running, playing at horses. Seryozha! And I’m losing
everything and not geing him back. Yes, I’m losing everything, if he doesn’t
return. Perhaps he was late for the train and has come back by now. Longing for
humiliation again!" she said to herself. "No, I’ll go to Dolly, and say straight out
to her, I’m unhappy, I deserve this, I’m to blame, but still I’m unhappy, help me.
ese horses, this carriage—how loathsome I am to myself in this carriage—all
his; but I won’t see them again."
inking over the words in which she would tell Dolly, and mentally working her heart up to great bierness, Anna went upstairs.
"Is there anyone with her?" she asked in the hall.
"Katerina Alexandrovna Levin," answered the footman.
"Kiy! Kiy, whom Vronsky was in love with!" thought Anna, "the girl he
thinks of with love. He’s sorry he didn’t marry her. But me he thinks of with
hatred, and is sorry he had anything to do with me."
e sisters were having a consultation about nursing when Anna called.
Dolly went down alone to see the visitor who had interrupted their conversation.
"Well, so you’ve not gone away yet? I meant to have come to you," she said;
"I had a leer from Stiva today."
"We had a telegram too," answered Anna, looking round for Kiy.
"He writes that he can’t make out quite what Alexey Alexandrovitch wants,
but he won’t go away without a decisive answer."
"I thought you had someone with you. Can I see the leer?"
"Yes; Kiy," said Dolly, embarrassed. "She stayed in the nursery. She has
been very ill."
"So I heard. May I see the leer?"
"I’ll get it directly. But he doesn’t refuse; on the contrary, Stiva has hopes,"
said Dolly, stopping in the doorway.
"I haven’t, and indeed I don’t wish it," said Anna.
"What’s this? Does Kiy consider it degrading to meet me?" thought Anna
when she was alone. "Perhaps she’s right, too. But it’s not for her, the girl who
was in love with Vronsky, it’s not for her to show me that, even if it is true. I
know that in my position I can’t be received by any decent woman. I knew that
from the ﬁrst moment I sacriﬁced everything to him. And this is my reward! Oh,
how I hate him! And what did I come here for? I’m worse here, more miserable."
She heard from the next room the sisters’ voices in consultation. "And what am I
going to say to Dolly now? Amuse Kiy by the sight of my wretchedness, submit
to her patronizing? No; and besides, Dolly wouldn’t understand. And it would
be no good my telling her. It would only be interesting to see Kiy, to show her
how I despise everyone and everything, how nothing maers to me now."

dclxxix
Dolly came in with the leer. Anna read it and handed it back in silence.
"I knew all that," she said, "and it doesn’t interest me in the least."
"Oh, why so? On the contrary, I have hopes," said Dolly, looking inquisitively at Anna. She had never seen her in such a strangely irritable condition.
"When are you going away?" she asked.
Anna, half-closing her eyes, looked straight before her and did not answer.
"Why does Kiy shrink from me?" she said, looking at the door and ﬂushing
red.
"Oh, what nonsense! She’s nursing, and things aren’t going right with her,
and I’ve been advising her…. She’s delighted. She’ll be here in a minute," said
Dolly awkwardly, not clever at lying. "Yes, here she is."
Hearing that Anna had called, Kiy had wanted not to appear, but Dolly
persuaded her. Rallying her forces, Kiy went in, walked up to her, blushing, and
shook hands.
"I am so glad to see you," she said with a trembling voice.
Kiy had been thrown into confusion by the inward conﬂict between her
antagonism to this bad woman and her desire to be nice to her. But as soon as she
saw Anna’s lovely and aractive face, all feeling of antagonism disappeared.
"I should not have been surprised if you had not cared to meet me. I’m used
to everything. You have been ill? Yes, you are changed," said Anna.
Kiy felt that Anna was looking at her with hostile eyes. She ascribed this
hostility to the awkward position in which Anna, who had once patronized her,
must feel with her now, and she felt sorry for her.
ey talked of Kiy’s illness, of the baby, of Stiva, but it was obvious that
nothing interested Anna.
"I came to say good-bye to you," she said, geing up.
"Oh, when are you going?"
But again not answering, Anna turned to Kiy.
"Yes, I am very glad to have seen you," she said with a smile. "I have heard
so much of you from everyone, even from your husband. He came to see me, and
I liked him exceedingly," she said, unmistakably with malicious intent. "Where is
he?"
"He has gone back to the country," said Kiy, blushing.
"Remember me to him, be sure you do."
"I’ll be sure to!" Kiy said naïvely, looking compassionately into her eyes.
"So good-bye, Dolly." And kissing Dolly and shaking hands with Kiy, Anna
went out hurriedly.
"She’s just the same and just as charming! She’s very lovely!" said Kiy,
when she was alone with her sister. "But there’s something piteous about her.
Awfully piteous!"

dclxxx
"Yes, there’s something unusual about her today," said Dolly. "When I went
with her into the hall, I fancied she was almost crying."

Chapter 
Anna got into the carriage again in an even worse frame of mind than when she
set out from home. To her previous tortures was added now that sense of mortiﬁcation and of being an outcast which she had felt so distinctly on meeting Kiy.
"Where to? Home?" asked Pyotr.
"Yes, home," she said, not even thinking now where she was going.
"How they looked at me as something dreadful, incomprehensible, and curious! What can he be telling the other with such warmth?" she thought, staring at
two men who walked by. "Can one ever tell anyone what one is feeling? I meant
to tell Dolly, and it’s a good thing I didn’t tell her. How pleased she would have
been at my misery! She would have concealed it, but her chief feeling would have
been delight at my being punished for the happiness she envied me for. Kiy, she
would have been even more pleased. How I can see through her! She knows I was
more than usually sweet to her husband. And she’s jealous and hates me. And
she despises me. In her eyes I’m an immoral woman. If I were an immoral woman
I could have made her husband fall in love with me … if I’d cared to. And, indeed,
I did care to. ere’s someone who’s pleased with himself," she thought, as she
saw a fat, rubicund gentleman coming towards her. He took her for an acquaintance, and lied his glossy hat above his bald, glossy head, and then perceived his
mistake. "He thought he knew me. Well, he knows me as well as anyone in the
world knows me. I don’t know myself. I know my appetites, as the French say.
ey want that dirty ice cream, that they do know for certain," she thought, looking at two boys stopping an ice cream seller, who took a barrel oﬀ his head and
began wiping his perspiring face with a towel. "We all want what is sweet and
nice. If not sweetmeats, then a dirty ice. And Kiy’s the same—if not Vronsky,
then Levin. And she envies me, and hates me. And we all hate each other. I Kiy,
Kiy me. Yes, that’s the truth. ‘Tiutkin, coiﬀeur.’ Je me fais coiﬀer par Tiutkin….
I’ll tell him that when he comes," she thought and smiled. But the same instant she
remembered that she had no one now to tell anything amusing to. "And there’s
nothing amusing, nothing mirthful, really. It’s all hateful. ey’re singing for
vespers, and how carefully that merchant crosses himself! as if he were afraid of
missing something. Why these churches and this singing and this humbug? Simply to conceal that we all hate each other like these cab drivers who are abusing
each other so angrily. Yashvin says, ‘He wants to strip me of my shirt, and I him
of his.’ Yes, that’s the truth!"

dclxxxi
She was plunged in these thoughts, which so engrossed her that she le oﬀ
thinking of her own position, when the carriage drew up at the steps of her house.
It was only when she saw the porter running out to meet her that she remembered
she had sent the note and the telegram.
"Is there an answer?" she inquired.
"I’ll see this minute," answered the porter, and glancing into his room, he
took out and gave her the thin square envelope of a telegram. "I can’t come before
ten o’clock.—Vronsky," she read.
"And hasn’t the messenger come back?"
"No," answered the porter.
"en, since it’s so, I know what I must do," she said, and feeling a vague
fury and craving for revenge rising up within her, she ran upstairs. "I’ll go to him
myself. Before going away forever, I’ll tell him all. Never have I hated anyone
as I hate that man!" she thought. Seeing his hat on the rack, she shuddered with
aversion. She did not consider that his telegram was an answer to her telegram
and that he had not yet received her note. She pictured him to herself as talking
calmly to his mother and Princess Sorokina and rejoicing at her suﬀerings. "Yes, I
must go quickly," she said, not knowing yet where she was going. She longed to get
away as quickly as possible from the feelings she had gone through in that awful
house. e servants, the walls, the things in that house—all aroused repulsion and
hatred in her and lay like a weight upon her.
"Yes, I must go to the railway station, and if he’s not there, then go there and
catch him." Anna looked at the railway timetable in the newspapers. An evening
train went at two minutes past eight. "Yes, I shall be in time." She gave orders for
the other horses to be put in the carriage, and packed in a traveling-bag the things
needed for a few days. She knew she would never come back here again.
Among the plans that came into her head she vaguely determined that aer
what would happen at the station or at the countess’s house, she would go as far
as the ﬁrst town on the Nizhni road and stop there.
Dinner was on the table; she went up, but the smell of the bread and cheese
was enough to make her feel that all food was disgusting. She ordered the carriage
and went out. e house threw a shadow now right across the street, but it was
a bright evening and still warm in the sunshine. Annushka, who came down
with her things, and Pyotr, who put the things in the carriage, and the coachman,
evidently out of humor, were all hateful to her, and irritated her by their words
and actions.
"I don’t want you, Pyotr."
"But how about the ticket?"
"Well, as you like, it doesn’t maer," she said crossly.
Pyotr jumped on the box, and puing his arms akimbo, told the coachman

dclxxxii
to drive to the booking-oﬃce.

Chapter 
"Here it is again! Again I understand it all!" Anna said to herself, as soon as the
carriage had started and swaying lightly, rumbled over the tiny cobbles of the
paved road, and again one impression followed rapidly upon another.
"Yes; what was the last thing I thought of so clearly?" she tried to recall
it. "‘Tiutkin, coiﬀeur?’—no, not that. Yes, of what Yashvin says, the struggle for
existence and hatred is the one thing that holds men together. No, it’s a useless
journey you’re making," she said, mentally addressing a party in a coach and four,
evidently going for an excursion into the country. "And the dog you’re taking
with you will be no help to you. You can’t get away from yourselves." Turning her
eyes in the direction Pyotr had turned to look, she saw a factory hand almost dead
drunk, with hanging head, being led away by a policeman. "Come, he’s found a
quicker way," she thought. "Count Vronsky and I did not ﬁnd that happiness either,
though we expected so much from it." And now for the ﬁrst time Anna turned that
glaring light in which she was seeing everything on to her relations with him,
which she had hitherto avoided thinking about. "What was it he sought in me?
Not love so much as the satisfaction of vanity." She remembered his words, the
expression of his face, that recalled an abject seer-dog, in the early days of their
connection. And everything now conﬁrmed this. "Yes, there was the triumph of
success in him. Of course there was love too, but the chief element was the pride
of success. He boasted of me. Now that’s over. ere’s nothing to be proud of.
Not to be proud of, but to be ashamed of. He has taken from me all he could, and
now I am no use to him. He is weary of me and is trying not to be dishonorable
in his behavior to me. He let that out yesterday—he wants divorce and marriage
so as to burn his ships. He loves me, but how? e zest is gone, as the English
say. at fellow wants everyone to admire him and is very much pleased with
himself," she thought, looking at a red-faced clerk, riding on a riding school horse.
"Yes, there’s not the same ﬂavor about me for him now. If I go away from him, at
the boom of his heart he will be glad."
is was not mere supposition, she saw it distinctly in the piercing light,
which revealed to her now the meaning of life and human relations.
"My love keeps growing more passionate and egoistic, while his is waning
and waning, and that’s why we’re driing apart." She went on musing. "And
there’s no help for it. He is everything for me, and I want him more and more to
give himself up to me entirely. And he wants more and more to get away from
me. We walked to meet each other up to the time of our love, and then we have

dclxxxiii
been irresistibly driing in diﬀerent directions. And there’s no altering that. He
tells me I’m insanely jealous, and I have told myself that I am insanely jealous; but
it’s not true. I’m not jealous, but I’m unsatisﬁed. But…" she opened her lips, and
shied her place in the carriage in the excitement, aroused by the thought that
suddenly struck her. "If I could be anything but a mistress, passionately caring
for nothing but his caresses; but I can’t and I don’t care to be anything else. And
by that desire I rouse aversion in him, and he rouses fury in me, and it cannot
be diﬀerent. Don’t I know that he wouldn’t deceive me, that he has no schemes
about Princess Sorokina, that he’s not in love with Kiy, that he won’t desert me!
I know all that, but it makes it no beer for me. If without loving me, from duty
he’ll be good and kind to me, without what I want, that’s a thousand times worse
than unkindness! at’s—hell! And that’s just how it is. For a long while now he
hasn’t loved me. And where love ends, hate begins. I don’t know these streets at
all. Hills it seems, and still houses, and houses …. And in the houses always people
and people…. How many of them, no end, and all hating each other! Come, let me
try and think what I want, to make me happy. Well? Suppose I am divorced, and
Alexey Alexandrovitch lets me have Seryozha, and I marry Vronsky." inking of
Alexey Alexandrovitch, she at once pictured him with extraordinary vividness as
though he were alive before her, with his mild, lifeless, dull eyes, the blue veins in
his white hands, his intonations and the cracking of his ﬁngers, and remembering
the feeling which had existed between them, and which was also called love, she
shuddered with loathing. "Well, I’m divorced, and become Vronsky’s wife. Well,
will Kiy cease looking at me as she looked at me today? No. And will Seryozha
leave oﬀ asking and wondering about my two husbands? And is there any new
feeling I can awaken between Vronsky and me? Is there possible, if not happiness,
some sort of ease from misery? No, no!" she answered now without the slightest
hesitation. "Impossible! We are drawn apart by life, and I make his unhappiness,
and he mine, and there’s no altering him or me. Every aempt has been made,
the screw has come unscrewed. Oh, a beggar woman with a baby. She thinks I’m
sorry for her. Aren’t we all ﬂung into the world only to hate each other, and so
to torture ourselves and each other? Schoolboys coming—laughing Seryozha?"
she thought. "I thought, too, that I loved him, and used to be touched by my own
tenderness. But I have lived without him, I gave him up for another love, and did
not regret the exchange till that love was satisﬁed." And with loathing she thought
of what she meant by that love. And the clearness with which she saw life now,
her own and all men’s, was a pleasure to her. "It’s so with me and Pyotr, and the
coachman, Fyodor, and that merchant, and all the people living along the Volga,
where those placards invite one to go, and everywhere and always," she thought
when she had driven under the low-pitched roof of the Nizhigorod station, and
the porters ran to meet her.

dclxxxiv
"A ticket to Obiralovka?" said Pyotr.
She had uerly forgoen where and why she was going, and only by a great
eﬀort she understood the question.
"Yes," she said, handing him her purse, and taking a lile red bag in her hand,
she got out of the carriage.
Making her way through the crowd to the ﬁrst-class waiting-room, she
gradually recollected all the details of her position, and the plans between which
she was hesitating. And again at the old sore places, hope and then despair poisoned the wounds of her tortured, fearfully throbbing heart. As she sat on the
star-shaped sofa waiting for the train, she gazed with aversion at the people coming and going (they were all hateful to her), and thought how she would arrive at
the station, would write him a note, and what she would write to him, and how he
was at this moment complaining to his mother of his position, not understanding
her suﬀerings, and how she would go into the room, and what she would say to
him. en she thought that life might still be happy, and how miserably she loved
and hated him, and how fearfully her heart was beating.

Chapter 
A bell rang, some young men, ugly and impudent, and at the same time careful
of the impression they were making, hurried by. Pyotr, too, crossed the room
in his livery and top-boots, with his dull, animal face, and came up to her to
take her to the train. Some noisy men were quiet as she passed them on the
platform, and one whispered something about her to another—something vile, no
doubt. She stepped up on the high step, and sat down in a carriage by herself on
a dirty seat that had been white. Her bag lay beside her, shaken up and down
by the springiness of the seat. With a foolish smile Pyotr raised his hat, with
its colored band, at the window, in token of farewell; an impudent conductor
slammed the door and the latch. A grotesque-looking lady wearing a bustle (Anna
mentally undressed the woman, and was appalled at her hideousness), and a lile
girl laughing aﬀectedly ran down the platform.
"Katerina Andreevna, she’s got them all, ma tante!" cried the girl.
"Even the child’s hideous and aﬀected," thought Anna. To avoid seeing anyone, she got up quickly and seated herself at the opposite window of the empty
carriage. A misshapen-looking peasant covered with dirt, in a cap from which
his tangled hair stuck out all round, passed by that window, stooping down to the
carriage wheels. "ere’s something familiar about that hideous peasant," thought
Anna. And remembering her dream, she moved away to the opposite door, shaking with terror. e conductor opened the door and let in a man and his wife.

dclxxxv
"Do you wish to get out?"
Anna made no answer. e conductor and her two fellow-passengers did
not notice under her veil her panic-stricken face. She went back to her corner and
sat down. e couple seated themselves on the opposite side, and intently but
surreptitiously scrutinized her clothes. Both husband and wife seemed repulsive
to Anna. e husband asked, would she allow him to smoke, obviously not with a
view to smoking but to geing into conversation with her. Receiving her assent,
he said to his wife in French something about caring less to smoke than to talk.
ey made inane and aﬀected remarks to one another, entirely for her beneﬁt.
Anna saw clearly that they were sick of each other, and hated each other. And no
one could have helped hating such miserable monstrosities.
A second bell sounded, and was followed by moving of luggage, noise,
shouting and laughter. It was so clear to Anna that there was nothing for anyone to be glad of, that this laughter irritated her agonizingly, and she would have
liked to stop up her ears not to hear it. At last the third bell rang, there was a
whistle and a hiss of steam, and a clank of chains, and the man in her carriage
crossed himself. "It would be interesting to ask him what meaning he aaches
to that," thought Anna, looking angrily at him. She looked past the lady out of
the window at the people who seemed whirling by as they ran beside the train or
stood on the platform. e train, jerking at regular intervals at the junctions of the
rails, rolled by the platform, past a stone wall, a signal-box, past other trains; the
wheels, moving more smoothly and evenly, resounded with a slight clang on the
rails. e window was lighted up by the bright evening sun, and a slight breeze
ﬂuered the curtain. Anna forgot her fellow passengers, and to the light swaying
of the train she fell to thinking again, as she breathed the fresh air.
"Yes, what did I stop at? at I couldn’t conceive a position in which life
would not be a misery, that we are all created to be miserable, and that we all
know it, and all invent means of deceiving each other. And when one sees the
truth, what is one to do?"
"at’s what reason is given man for, to escape from what worries him," said
the lady in French, lisping aﬀectedly, and obviously pleased with her phrase.
e words seemed an answer to Anna’s thoughts.
"To escape from what worries him," repeated Anna. And glancing at the
red-cheeked husband and the thin wife, she saw that the sickly wife considered
herself misunderstood, and the husband deceived her and encouraged her in that
idea of herself. Anna seemed to see all their history and all the crannies of their
souls, as it were turning a light upon them. But there was nothing interesting in
them, and she pursued her thought.
"Yes, I’m very much worried, and that’s what reason was given me for, to
escape; so then one must escape: why not put out the light when there’s nothing

dclxxxvi
more to look at, when it’s sickening to look at it all? But how? Why did the
conductor run along the footboard, why are they shrieking, those young men in
that train? why are they talking, why are they laughing? It’s all falsehood, all
lying, all humbug, all cruelty!…"
When the train came into the station, Anna got out into the crowd of passengers, and moving apart from them as if they were lepers, she stood on the
platform, trying to think what she had come here for, and what she meant to do.
Everything that had seemed to her possible before was now so diﬃcult to consider, especially in this noisy crowd of hideous people who would not leave her
alone. One moment porters ran up to her proﬀering their services, then young
men, clacking their heels on the planks of the platform and talking loudly, stared
at her; people meeting her dodged past on the wrong side. Remembering that
she had meant to go on further if there were no answer, she stopped a porter and
asked if her coachman were not here with a note from Count Vronsky.
"Count Vronsky? ey sent up here from the Vronskys just this minute, to
meet Princess Sorokina and her daughter. And what is the coachman like?"
Just as she was talking to the porter, the coachman Mihail, red and cheerful
in his smart blue coat and chain, evidently proud of having so successfully performed his commission, came up to her and gave her a leer. She broke it open,
and her heart ached before she had read it.
"I am very sorry your note did not reach me. I will be home at ten," Vronsky
had wrien carelessly….
"Yes, that’s what I expected!" she said to herself with an evil smile.
"Very good, you can go home then," she said soly, addressing Mihail. She
spoke soly because the rapidity of her heart’s beating hindered her breathing.
"No, I won’t let you make me miserable," she thought menacingly, addressing not
him, not herself, but the power that made her suﬀer, and she walked along the
platform.
Two maid-servants walking along the platform turned their heads, staring
at her and making some remarks about her dress. "Real," they said of the lace she
was wearing. e young men would not leave her in peace. Again they passed by,
peering into her face, and with a laugh shouting something in an unnatural voice.
e station-master coming up asked her whether she was going by train. A boy
selling kvas never took his eyes oﬀ her. "My God! where am I to go?" she thought,
going farther and farther along the platform. At the end she stopped. Some ladies
and children, who had come to meet a gentleman in spectacles, paused in their
loud laughter and talking, and stared at her as she reached them. She quickened
her pace and walked away from them to the edge of the platform. A luggage train
was coming in. e platform began to sway, and she fancied she was in the train
again.

And all at once she thought of the man crushed by the train the day she had
ﬁrst met Vronsky, and she knew what she had to do. With a rapid, light step she
went down the steps that led from the tank to the rails and stopped quite near the
approaching train.
She looked at the lower part of the carriages, at the screws and chains and
the tall cast-iron wheel of the ﬁrst carriage slowly moving up, and trying to measure the middle between the front and back wheels, and the very minute when
that middle point would be opposite her.
"ere," she said to herself, looking into the shadow of the carriage, at the
sand and coal dust which covered the sleepers—"there, in the very middle, and I
will punish him and escape from everyone and from myself."
She tried to ﬂing herself below the wheels of the ﬁrst carriage as it reached
her; but the red bag which she tried to drop out of her hand delayed her, and she
was too late; she missed the moment. She had to wait for the next carriage. A
feeling such as she had known when about to take the ﬁrst plunge in bathing came
upon her, and she crossed herself. at familiar gesture brought back into her soul
a whole series of girlish and childish memories, and suddenly the darkness that
had covered everything for her was torn apart, and life rose up before her for an
instant with all its bright past joys. But she did not take her eyes from the wheels
of the second carriage. And exactly at the moment when the space between the
wheels came opposite her, she dropped the red bag, and drawing her head back
into her shoulders, fell on her hands under the carriage, and lightly, as though she
would rise again at once, dropped on to her knees. And at the same instant she
was terror-stricken at what she was doing. "Where am I? What am I doing? What
for?" She tried to get up, to drop backwards; but something huge and merciless
struck her on the head and rolled her on her back. "Lord, forgive me all!" she said,
feeling it impossible to struggle. A peasant muering something was working
at the iron above her. And the light by which she had read the book ﬁlled with
troubles, falsehoods, sorrow, and evil, ﬂared up more brightly than ever before,
lighted up for her all that had been in darkness, ﬂickered, began to grow dim, and
was quenched forever.

PART EIGHT

dclxxxviii

Chapter 
Almost two months had passed. e hot summer was half over, but Sergey
Ivanovitch was only just preparing to leave Moscow.
Sergey Ivanovitch’s life had not been uneventful during this time. A year
ago he had ﬁnished his book, the fruit of six years’ labor, "Sketch of a Survey of
the Principles and Forms of Government in Europe and Russia." Several sections
of this book and its introduction had appeared in periodical publications, and
other parts had been read by Sergey Ivanovitch to persons of his circle, so that
the leading ideas of the work could not be completely novel to the public. But still
Sergey Ivanovitch had expected that on its appearance his book would be sure to
make a serious impression on society, and if it did not cause a revolution in social
science it would, at any rate, make a great stir in the scientiﬁc world.
Aer the most conscientious revision the book had last year been published,
and had been distributed among the booksellers.
ough he asked no one about it, reluctantly and with feigned indiﬀerence
answered his friends’ inquiries as to how the book was going, and did not even
inquire of the booksellers how the book was selling, Sergey Ivanovitch was all
on the alert, with strained aention, watching for the ﬁrst impression his book
would make in the world and in literature.
But a week passed, a second, a third, and in society no impression whatever could be detected. His friends who were specialists and savants, occasionally—unmistakably from politeness—alluded to it. e rest of his acquaintances,
not interested in a book on a learned subject, did not talk of it at all. And society
generally—just now especially absorbed in other things—was absolutely indiﬀerent. In the press, too, for a whole month there was not a word about his book.
Sergey Ivanovitch had calculated to a nicety the time necessary for writing
a review, but a month passed, and a second, and still there was silence.
Only in the Northern Beetle, in a comic article on the singer Drabanti, who
had lost his voice, there was a contemptuous allusion to Koznishev’s book, suggesting that the book had been long ago seen through by everyone, and was a
subject of general ridicule.
At last in the third month a critical article appeared in a serious review.
Sergey Ivanovitch knew the author of the article. He had met him once at Golubtsov’s.
e author of the article was a young man, an invalid, very bold as a writer,
but extremely deﬁcient in breeding and shy in personal relations.
In spite of his absolute contempt for the author, it was with complete respect
that Sergey Ivanovitch set about reading the article. e article was awful.
e critic had undoubtedly put an interpretation upon the book which could

dclxxxix
not possibly be put on it. But he had selected quotations so adroitly that for people
who had not read the book (and obviously scarcely anyone had read it) it seemed
absolutely clear that the whole book was nothing but a medley of high-ﬂown
phrases, not even—as suggested by marks of interrogation—used appropriately,
and that the author of the book was a person absolutely without knowledge of
the subject. And all this was so wiily done that Sergey Ivanovitch would not
have disowned such wit himself. But that was just what was so awful.
In spite of the scrupulous conscientiousness with which Sergey Ivanovitch
veriﬁed the correctness of the critic’s arguments, he did not for a minute stop to
ponder over the faults and mistakes which were ridiculed; but unconsciously he
began immediately trying to recall every detail of his meeting and conversation
with the author of the article.
"Didn’t I oﬀend him in some way?" Sergey Ivanovitch wondered.
And remembering that when they met he had corrected the young man
about something he had said that betrayed ignorance, Sergey Ivanovitch found
the clue to explain the article.
is article was followed by a deadly silence about the book both in the press
and in conversation, and Sergey Ivanovitch saw that his six years’ task, toiled at
with such love and labor, had gone, leaving no trace.
Sergey Ivanovitch’s position was still more diﬃcult from the fact that, since
he had ﬁnished his book, he had had no more literary work to do, such as had
hitherto occupied the greater part of his time.
Sergey Ivanovitch was clever, cultivated, healthy, and energetic, and he did
not know what use to make of his energy. Conversations in drawing rooms,
in meetings, assemblies, and commiees—everywhere where talk was possible—took up part of his time. But being used for years to town life, he did not
waste all his energies in talk, as his less experienced younger brother did, when
he was in Moscow. He had a great deal of leisure and intellectual energy still to
dispose of.
Fortunately for him, at this period so diﬃcult for him from the failure of
his book, the various public questions of the dissenting sects, of the American
alliance, of the Samara famine, of exhibitions, and of spiritualism, were deﬁnitely
replaced in public interest by the Slavonic question, which had hitherto rather
languidly interested society, and Sergey Ivanovitch, who had been one of the ﬁrst
to raise this subject, threw himself into it heart and soul.
In the circle to which Sergey Ivanovitch belonged, nothing was talked of or
wrien about just now but the Servian War. Everything that the idle crowd usually does to kill time was done now for the beneﬁt of the Slavonic States. Balls,
concerts, dinners, matchboxes, ladies’ dresses, beer, restaurants—everything testiﬁed to sympathy with the Slavonic peoples.

dcxc
From much of what was spoken and wrien on the subject, Sergey
Ivanovitch diﬀered on various points. He saw that the Slavonic question had
become one of those fashionable distractions which succeed one another in providing society with an object and an occupation. He saw, too, that a great
many people were taking up the subject from motives of self-interest and selfadvertisement. He recognized that the newspapers published a great deal that
was superﬂuous and exaggerated, with the sole aim of aracting aention and
outbidding one another. He saw that in this general movement those who thrust
themselves most forward and shouted the loudest were men who had failed and
were smarting under a sense of injury—generals without armies, ministers not in
the ministry, journalists not on any paper, party leaders without followers. He
saw that there was a great deal in it that was frivolous and absurd. But he saw
and recognized an unmistakable growing enthusiasm, uniting all classes, with
which it was impossible not to sympathize. e massacre of men who were fellow Christians, and of the same Slavonic race, excited sympathy for the suﬀerers
and indignation against the oppressors. And the heroism of the Servians and
Montenegrins struggling for a great cause begot in the whole people a longing to
help their brothers not in word but in deed.
But in this there was another aspect that rejoiced Sergey Ivanovitch. at
was the manifestation of public opinion. e public had deﬁnitely expressed its
desire. e soul of the people had, as Sergey Ivanovitch said, found expression.
And the more he worked in this cause, the more incontestable it seemed to him
that it was a cause destined to assume vast dimensions, to create an epoch.
He threw himself heart and soul into the service of this great cause, and
forgot to think about his book. His whole time now was engrossed by it, so that
he could scarcely manage to answer all the leers and appeals addressed to him.
He worked the whole spring and part of the summer, and it was only in July that
he prepared to go away to his brother’s in the country.
He was going both to rest for a fortnight, and in the very heart of the people,
in the farthest wilds of the country, to enjoy the sight of that upliing of the spirit
of the people, of which, like all residents in the capital and big towns, he was fully
persuaded. Katavasov had long been meaning to carry out his promise to stay
with Levin, and so he was going with him.

Chapter 
Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had only just reached the station of the Kursk
line, which was particularly busy and full of people that day, when, looking round
for the groom who was following with their things, they saw a party of volunteers

dcxci
driving up in four cabs. Ladies met them with bouquets of ﬂowers, and followed
by the rushing crowd they went into the station.
One of the ladies, who had met the volunteers, came out of the hall and
addressed Sergey Ivanovitch.
"You too come to see them o?" she asked in French.
"No, I’m going away myself, princess. To my brother’s for a holiday. Do
you always see them o?" said Sergey Ivanovitch with a hardly perceptible smile.
"Oh, that would be impossible!" answered the princess. "Is it true that eight
hundred have been sent from us already? Malvinsky wouldn’t believe me."
"More than eight hundred. If you reckon those who have been sent not
directly from Moscow, over a thousand," answered Sergey Ivanovitch.
"ere! at’s just what I said!" exclaimed the lady. "And it’s true too, I
suppose, that more than a million has been subscribed?"
"Yes, princess."
"What do you say to today’s telegram? Beaten the Turks again."
"Yes, so I saw," answered Sergey Ivanovitch. ey were speaking of the last
telegram stating that the Turks had been for three days in succession beaten at all
points and put to ﬂight, and that tomorrow a decisive engagement was expected.
"Ah, by the way, a splendid young fellow has asked leave to go, and they’ve
made some diﬃculty, I don’t know why. I meant to ask you; I know him; please
write a note about his case. He’s being sent by Countess Lidia Ivanovna."
Sergey Ivanovitch asked for all the details the princess knew about the
young man, and going into the ﬁrst-class waiting-room, wrote a note to the person on whom the granting of leave of absence depended, and handed it to the
princess.
"You know Count Vronsky, the notorious one … is going by this train?" said
the princess with a smile full of triumph and meaning, when he found her again
and gave her the leer.
"I had heard he was going, but I did not know when. By this train?"
"I’ve seen him. He’s here: there’s only his mother seeing him oﬀ. It’s the
best thing, anyway, that he could do."
"Oh, yes, of course."
While they were talking the crowd streamed by them into the dining room.
ey went forward too, and heard a gentleman with a glass in his hand delivering a loud discourse to the volunteers. "In the service of religion, humanity, and
our brothers," the gentleman said, his voice growing louder and louder; "to this
great cause mother Moscow dedicates you with her blessing. Jivio!" he concluded,
loudly and tearfully.
Everyone shouted Jivio! and a fresh crowd dashed into the hall, almost carrying the princess oﬀ her legs.

dcxcii
"Ah, princess! that was something like!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, suddenly appearing in the middle of the crowd and beaming upon them with a delighted smile. "Capitally, warmly said, wasn’t it? Bravo! And Sergey Ivanovitch!
Why, you ought to have said something—just a few words, you know, to encourage them; you do that so well," he added with a so, respectful, and discreet smile,
moving Sergey Ivanovitch forward a lile by the arm.
"No, I’m just oﬀ."
"Where to?"
"To the country, to my brother’s," answered Sergey Ivanovitch.
"en you’ll see my wife. I’ve wrien to her, but you’ll see her ﬁrst. Please
tell her that they’ve seen me and that it’s ‘all right,’ as the English say. She’ll
understand. Oh, and be so good as to tell her I’m appointed secretary of the commiee…. But she’ll understand! You know, les petites misères de la vie humaine,"
he said, as it were apologizing to the princess. "And Princess Myakaya—not Liza,
but Bibish—is sending a thousand guns and twelve nurses. Did I tell you?"
"Yes, I heard so," answered Koznishev indiﬀerently.
"It’s a pity you’re going away," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Tomorrow we’re
giving a dinner to two who’re seing oﬀ—Dimer-Bartnyansky from Petersburg
and our Veslovsky, Grisha. ey’re both going. Veslovsky’s only lately married.
ere’s a ﬁne fellow for you! Eh, princess?" he turned to the lady.
e princess looked at Koznishev without replying. But the fact that Sergey
Ivanovitch and the princess seemed anxious to get rid of him did not in the least
disconcert Stepan Arkadyevitch. Smiling, he stared at the feather in the princess’s
hat, and then about him as though he were going to pick something up. Seeing
a lady approaching with a collecting box, he beckoned her up and put in a ﬁverouble note.
"I can never see these collecting boxes unmoved while I’ve money in my
pocket," he said. "And how about today’s telegram? Fine chaps those Montenegrins!"
"You don’t say so!" he cried, when the princess told him that Vronsky was
going by this train. For an instant Stepan Arkadyevitch’s face looked sad, but a
minute later, when, stroking his mustaches and swinging as he walked, he went
into the hall where Vronsky was, he had completely forgoen his own despairing
sobs over his sister’s corpse, and he saw in Vronsky only a hero and an old friend.
"With all his faults one can’t refuse to do him justice," said the princess
to Sergey Ivanovitch as soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch had le them. "What a
typically Russian, Slav nature! Only, I’m afraid it won’t be pleasant for Vronsky
to see him. Say what you will, I’m touched by that man’s fate. Do talk to him a
lile on the way," said the princess.
"Yes, perhaps, if it happens so."

dcxciii
"I never liked him. But this atones for a great deal. He’s not merely going
himself, he’s taking a squadron at his own expense."
"Yes, so I heard."
A bell sounded. Everyone crowded to the doors. "Here he is!" said the
princess, indicating Vronsky, who with his mother on his arm walked by, wearing
a long overcoat and wide-brimmed black hat. Oblonsky was walking beside him,
talking eagerly of something.
Vronsky was frowning and looking straight before him, as though he did
not hear what Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying.
Probably on Oblonsky’s pointing them out, he looked round in the direction
where the princess and Sergey Ivanovitch were standing, and without speaking
lied his hat. His face, aged and worn by suﬀering, looked stony.
Going onto the platform, Vronsky le his mother and disappeared into a
compartment.
On the platform there rang out "God save the Tsar," then shouts of "hurrah!"
and "jivio!" One of the volunteers, a tall, very young man with a hollow chest, was
particularly conspicuous, bowing and waving his felt hat and a nosegay over his
head. en two oﬃcers emerged, bowing too, and a stout man with a big beard,
wearing a greasy forage cap.

Chapter 
Saying good-bye to the princess, Sergey Ivanovitch was joined by Katavasov; together they got into a carriage full to overﬂowing, and the train started.
At Tsaritsino station the train was met by a chorus of young men singing
"Hail to ee!" Again the volunteers bowed and poked their heads out, but Sergey
Ivanovitch paid no aention to them. He had had so much to do with the volunteers that the type was familiar to him and did not interest him. Katavasov, whose
scientiﬁc work had prevented his having a chance of observing them hitherto, was
very much interested in them and questioned Sergey Ivanovitch.
Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to go into the second-class and talk to them
himself. At the next station Katavasov acted on this suggestion.
At the ﬁrst stop he moved into the second-class and made the acquaintance
of the volunteers. ey were siing in a corner of the carriage, talking loudly
and obviously aware that the aention of the passengers and Katavasov as he
got in was concentrated upon them. More loudly than all talked the tall, hollowchested young man. He was unmistakably tipsy, and was relating some story that
had occurred at his school. Facing him sat a middle-aged oﬃcer in the Austrian
military jacket of the Guards uniform. He was listening with a smile to the hollow-

dcxciv
chested youth, and occasionally pulling him up. e third, in an artillery uniform,
was siing on a box beside them. A fourth was asleep.
Entering into conversation with the youth, Katavasov learned that he was
a wealthy Moscow merchant who had run through a large fortune before he was
two-and-twenty. Katavasov did not like him, because he was unmanly and eﬀeminate and sickly. He was obviously convinced, especially now aer drinking, that
he was performing a heroic action, and he bragged of it in the most unpleasant
way.
e second, the retired oﬃcer, made an unpleasant impression too upon
Katavasov. He was, it seemed, a man who had tried everything. He had been
on a railway, had been a land-steward, and had started factories, and he talked,
quite without necessity, of all he had done, and used learned expressions quite
inappropriately.
e third, the artilleryman, on the contrary, struck Katavasov very favorably. He was a quiet, modest fellow, unmistakably impressed by the knowledge of
the oﬃcer and the heroic self-sacriﬁce of the merchant and saying nothing about
himself. When Katavasov asked him what had impelled him to go to Servia, he
answered modestly:
"Oh, well, everyone’s going. e Servians want help, too. I’m sorry for
them."
"Yes, you artillerymen especially are scarce there," said Katavasov.
"Oh, I wasn’t long in the artillery, maybe they’ll put me into the infantry or
the cavalry."
"Into the infantry when they need artillery more than anything?" said
Katavasov, fancying from the artilleryman’s apparent age that he must have
reached a fairly high grade.
"I wasn’t long in the artillery; I’m a cadet retired," he said, and he began to
explain how he had failed in his examination.
All of this together made a disagreeable impression on Katavasov, and when
the volunteers got out at a station for a drink, Katavasov would have liked to
compare his unfavorable impression in conversation with someone. ere was
an old man in the carriage, wearing a military overcoat, who had been listening
all the while to Katavasov’s conversation with the volunteers. When they were
le alone, Katavasov addressed him.
"What diﬀerent positions they come from, all those fellows who are going
oﬀ there," Katavasov said vaguely, not wishing to express his own opinion, and at
the same time anxious to ﬁnd out the old man’s views.
e old man was an oﬃcer who had served on two campaigns. He knew
what makes a soldier, and judging by the appearance and the talk of those persons,
by the swagger with which they had recourse to the bole on the journey, he

dcxcv
considered them poor soldiers. Moreover, he lived in a district town, and he was
longing to tell how one soldier had volunteered from his town, a drunkard and a
thief whom no one would employ as a laborer. But knowing by experience that in
the present condition of the public temper it was dangerous to express an opinion
opposed to the general one, and especially to criticize the volunteers unfavorably,
he too watched Katavasov without commiing himself.
"Well, men are wanted there," he said, laughing with his eyes. And they fell
to talking of the last war news, and each concealed from the other his perplexity as
to the engagement expected next day, since the Turks had been beaten, according
to the latest news, at all points. And so they parted, neither giving expression to
his opinion.
Katavasov went back to his own carriage, and with reluctant hypocrisy reported to Sergey Ivanovitch his observations of the volunteers, from which it
would appear that they were capital fellows.
At a big station at a town the volunteers were again greeted with shouts
and singing, again men and women with collecting boxes appeared, and provincial
ladies brought bouquets to the volunteers and followed them into the refreshment
room; but all this was on a much smaller and feebler scale than in Moscow.

Chapter 
While the train was stopping at the provincial town, Sergey Ivanovitch did not
go to the refreshment room, but walked up and down the platform.
e ﬁrst time he passed Vronsky’s compartment he noticed that the curtain
was drawn over the window; but as he passed it the second time he saw the old
countess at the window. She beckoned to Koznishev.
"I’m going, you see, taking him as far as Kursk," she said.
"Yes, so I heard," said Sergey Ivanovitch, standing at her window and peeping in. "What a noble act on his part!" he added, noticing that Vronsky was not
in the compartment.
"Yes, aer his misfortune, what was there for him to do?"
"What a terrible thing it was!" said Sergey Ivanovitch.
"Ah, what I have been through! But do get in…. Ah, what I have been
through!" she repeated, when Sergey Ivanovitch had got in and sat down beside
her. "You can’t conceive it! For six weeks he did not speak to anyone, and would
not touch food except when I implored him. And not for one minute could we
leave him alone. We took away everything he could have used against himself.
We lived on the ground ﬂoor, but there was no reckoning on anything. You know,
of course, that he had shot himself once already on her account," she said, and the

dcxcvi
old lady’s eyelashes twitched at the recollection. "Yes, hers was the ﬁing end for
such a woman. Even the death she chose was low and vulgar."
"It’s not for us to judge, countess," said Sergey Ivanovitch; "but I can understand that it has been very hard for you."
"Ah, don’t speak of it! I was staying on my estate, and he was with me. A
note was brought him. He wrote an answer and sent it oﬀ. We hadn’t an idea that
she was close by at the station. In the evening I had only just gone to my room,
when my Mary told me a lady had thrown herself under the train. Something
seemed to strike me at once. I knew it was she. e ﬁrst thing I said was, he
was not to be told. But they’d told him already. His coachman was there and
saw it all. When I ran into his room, he was beside himself—it was fearful to
see him. He didn’t say a word, but galloped oﬀ there. I don’t know to this day
what happened there, but he was brought back at death’s door. I shouldn’t have
known him. Prostration complete, the doctor said. And that was followed almost
by madness. Oh, why talk of it!" said the countess with a wave of her hand. "It
was an awful time! No, say what you will, she was a bad woman. Why, what is
the meaning of such desperate passions? It was all to show herself something out
of the way. Well, and that she did do. She brought herself to ruin and two good
men—her husband and my unhappy son."
"And what did her husband do?" asked Sergey Ivanovitch.
"He has taken her daughter. Alexey was ready to agree to anything at ﬁrst.
Now it worries him terribly that he should have given his own child away to
another man. But he can’t take back his word. Karenin came to the funeral. But
we tried to prevent his meeting Alexey. For him, for her husband, it was easier,
anyway. She had set him free. But my poor son was uerly given up to her. He
had thrown up everything, his career, me, and even then she had no mercy on
him, but of set purpose she made his ruin complete. No, say what you will, her
very death was the death of a vile woman, of no religious feeling. God forgive
me, but I can’t help hating the memory of her, when I look at my son’s misery!"
"But how is he now?"
"It was a blessing from Providence for us—this Servian war. I’m old, and
I don’t understand the rights and wrongs of it, but it’s come as a providential
blessing to him. Of course for me, as his mother, it’s terrible; and what’s worse,
they say, ce n’est pas très bien vu a Pétersbourg. But it can’t be helped! It was the
one thing that could rouse him. Yashvin—a friend of his—he had lost all he had
at cards and he was going to Servia. He came to see him and persuaded him to
go. Now it’s an interest for him. Do please talk to him a lile. I want to distract
his mind. He’s so low-spirited. And as bad luck would have it, he has toothache
too. But he’ll be delighted to see you. Please do talk to him; he’s walking up and
down on that side."

dcxcvii
Sergey Ivanovitch said he would be very glad to, and crossed over to the
other side of the station.

Chapter 
In the slanting evening shadows cast by the baggage piled up on the platform,
Vronsky in his long overcoat and slouch hat, with his hands in his pockets, strode
up and down, like a wild beast in a cage, turning sharply aer twenty paces.
Sergey Ivanovitch fancied, as he approached him, that Vronsky saw him but was
pretending not to see. is did not aﬀect Sergey Ivanovitch in the slightest. He
was above all personal considerations with Vronsky.
At that moment Sergey Ivanovitch looked upon Vronsky as a man taking an
important part in a great cause, and Koznishev thought it his duty to encourage
him and express his approval. He went up to him.
Vronsky stood still, looked intently at him, recognized him, and going a few
steps forward to meet him, shook hands with him very warmly.
"Possibly you didn’t wish to see me," said Sergey Ivanovitch, "but couldn’t I
be of use to you?"
"ere’s no one I should less dislike seeing than you," said Vronsky. "Excuse
me; and there’s nothing in life for me to like."
"I quite understand, and I merely meant to oﬀer you my services," said
Sergey Ivanovitch, scanning Vronsky’s face, full of unmistakable suﬀering.
"Wouldn’t it be of use to you to have a leer to Ristitch—to Milan?"
"Oh, no!" Vronsky said, seeming to understand him with diﬃculty. "If you
don’t mind, let’s walk on. It’s so stuﬀy among the carriages. A leer? No, thank
you; to meet death one needs no leers of introduction. Nor for the Turks…" he
said, with a smile that was merely of the lips. His eyes still kept their look of
angry suﬀering.
"Yes; but you might ﬁnd it easier to get into relations, which are aer all
essential, with anyone prepared to see you. But that’s as you like. I was very
glad to hear of your intention. ere have been so many aacks made on the
volunteers, and a man like you raises them in public estimation."
"My use as a man," said Vronsky, "is that life’s worth nothing to me. And
that I’ve enough bodily energy to cut my way into their ranks, and to trample on
them or fall—I know that. I’m glad there’s something to give my life for, for it’s
not simply useless but loathsome to me. Anyone’s welcome to it." And his jaw
twitched impatiently from the incessant gnawing toothache, that prevented him
from even speaking with a natural expression.
"You will become another man, I predict," said Sergey Ivanovitch, feeling

dcxcviii
touched. "To deliver one’s brother-men from bondage is an aim worth death and
life. God grant you success outwardly—and inwardly peace," he added, and he
held out his hand. Vronsky warmly pressed his outstretched hand.
"Yes, as a weapon I may be of some use. But as a man, I’m a wreck," he
jerked out.
He could hardly speak for the throbbing ache in his strong teeth, that were
like rows of ivory in his mouth. He was silent, and his eyes rested on the wheels
of the tender, slowly and smoothly rolling along the rails.
And all at once a diﬀerent pain, not an ache, but an inner trouble, that set
his whole being in anguish, made him for an instant forget his toothache. As he
glanced at the tender and the rails, under the inﬂuence of the conversation with
a friend he had not met since his misfortune, he suddenly recalled her—that is,
what was le of her when he had run like one distraught into the cloak room
of the railway station—on the table, shamelessly sprawling out among strangers,
the bloodstained body so lately full of life; the head unhurt dropping back with its
weight of hair, and the curling tresses about the temples, and the exquisite face,
with red, half-opened mouth, the strange, ﬁxed expression, piteous on the lips
and awful in the still open eyes, that seemed to uer that fearful phrase—that he
would be sorry for it—that she had said when they were quarreling.
And he tried to think of her as she was when he met her the ﬁrst time, at a
railway station too, mysterious, exquisite, loving, seeking and giving happiness,
and not cruelly revengeful as he remembered her on that last moment. He tried
to recall his best moments with her, but those moments were poisoned forever.
He could only think of her as triumphant, successful in her menace of a wholly
useless remorse never to be eﬀaced. He lost all consciousness of toothache, and
his face worked with sobs.
Passing twice up and down beside the baggage in silence and regaining his
self-possession, he addressed Sergey Ivanovitch calmly:
"You have had no telegrams since yesterday’s? Yes, driven back for a third
time, but a decisive engagement expected for tomorrow."
And aer talking a lile more of King Milan’s proclamation, and the immense eﬀect it might have, they parted, going to their carriages on hearing the
second bell.

Chapter 
Sergey Ivanovitch had not telegraphed to his brother to send to meet him, as he
did not know when he should be able to leave Moscow. Levin was not at home
when Katavasov and Sergey Ivanovitch in a ﬂy hired at the station drove up to the

dcxcix
steps of the Pokrovskoe house, as black as Moors from the dust of the road. Kiy,
siing on the balcony with her father and sister, recognized her brother-in-law,
and ran down to meet him.
"What a shame not to have let us know," she said, giving her hand to Sergey
Ivanovitch, and puing her forehead up for him to kiss.
"We drove here capitally, and have not put you out," answered Sergey
Ivanovitch. "I’m so dirty. I’m afraid to touch you. I’ve been so busy, I didn’t
know when I should be able to tear myself away. And so you’re still as ever enjoying your peaceful, quiet happiness," he said, smiling, "out of the reach of the
current in your peaceful backwater. Here’s our friend Fyodor Vassilievitch who
has succeeded in geing here at last."
"But I’m not a negro, I shall look like a human being when I wash," said
Katavasov in his jesting fashion, and he shook hands and smiled, his teeth ﬂashing
white in his black face.
"Kostya will be delighted. He has gone to his selement. It’s time he should
be home."
"Busy as ever with his farming. It really is a peaceful backwater," said
Katavasov; "while we in town think of nothing but the Servian war. Well, how
does our friend look at it? He’s sure not to think like other people."
"Oh, I don’t know, like everybody else," Kiy answered, a lile embarrassed,
looking round at Sergey Ivanovitch. "I’ll send to fetch him. Papa’s staying with
us. He’s only just come home from abroad."
And making arrangements to send for Levin and for the guests to wash, one
in his room and the other in what had been Dolly’s, and giving orders for their
luncheon, Kiy ran out onto the balcony, enjoying the freedom, and rapidity of
movement, of which she had been deprived during the months of her pregnancy.
"It’s Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov, a professor," she said.
"Oh, that’s a bore in this heat," said the prince.
"No, papa, he’s very nice, and Kostya’s very fond of him," Kiy said, with a
deprecating smile, noticing the irony on her father’s face.
"Oh, I didn’t say anything."
"You go to them, darling," said Kiy to her sister, "and entertain them. ey
saw Stiva at the station; he was quite well. And I must run to Mitya. As illluck would have it, I haven’t fed him since tea. He’s awake now, and sure to be
screaming." And feeling a rush of milk, she hurried to the nursery.
is was not a mere guess; her connection with the child was still so close,
that she could gauge by the ﬂow of her milk his need of food, and knew for certain
he was hungry.
She knew he was crying before she reached the nursery. And he was indeed crying. She heard him and hastened. But the faster she went, the louder he

dcc
screamed. It was a ﬁne healthy scream, hungry and impatient.
"Has he been screaming long, nurse, very long?" said Kiy hurriedly, seating
herself on a chair, and preparing to give the baby the breast. "But give me him
quickly. Oh, nurse, how tiresome you are! ere, tie the cap aerwards, do!"
e baby’s greedy scream was passing into sobs.
"But you can’t manage so, ma’am," said Agafea Mihalovna, who was almost
always to be found in the nursery. "He must be put straight. A-oo! a-oo!" she
chanted over him, paying no aention to the mother.
e nurse brought the baby to his mother. Agafea Mihalovna followed him
with a face dissolving with tenderness.
"He knows me, he knows me. In God’s faith, Katerina Alexandrovna,
ma’am, he knew me!" Agafea Mihalovna cried above the baby’s screams.
But Kiy did not hear her words. Her impatience kept growing, like the
baby’s.
eir impatience hindered things for a while. e baby could not get hold
of the breast right, and was furious.
At last, aer despairing, breathless screaming, and vain sucking, things
went right, and mother and child felt simultaneously soothed, and both subsided
into calm.
"But poor darling, he’s all in perspiration!" said Kiy in a whisper, touching
the baby.
"What makes you think he knows you?" she added, with a sidelong glance
at the baby’s eyes, that peered roguishly, as she fancied, from under his cap, at his
rhythmically puﬃng cheeks, and the lile red-palmed hand he was waving.
"Impossible! If he knew anyone, he would have known me," said Kiy, in
response to Agafea Mihalovna’s statement, and she smiled.
She smiled because, though she said he could not know her, in her heart
she was sure that he knew not merely Agafea Mihalovna, but that he knew and
understood everything, and knew and understood a great deal too that no one
else knew, and that she, his mother, had learned and come to understand only
through him. To Agafea Mihalovna, to the nurse, to his grandfather, to his father
even, Mitya was a living being, requiring only material care, but for his mother
he had long been a mortal being, with whom there had been a whole series of
spiritual relations already.
"When he wakes up, please God, you shall see for yourself. en when I do
like this, he simply beams on me, the darling! Simply beams like a sunny day!"
said Agafea Mihalovna.
"Well, well; then we shall see," whispered Kiy. "But now go away, he’s
going to sleep."

dcci

Chapter 
Agafea Mihalovna went out on tiptoe; the nurse let down the blind, chased a ﬂy
out from under the muslin canopy of the crib, and a bumblebee struggling on the
window-frame, and sat down waving a faded branch of birch over the mother and
the baby.
"How hot it is! if God would send a drop of rain," she said.
"Yes, yes, sh—sh—sh—" was all Kiy answered, rocking a lile, and tenderly
squeezing the plump lile arm, with rolls of fat at the wrist, which Mitya still
waved feebly as he opened and shut his eyes. at hand worried Kiy; she longed
to kiss the lile hand, but was afraid to for fear of waking the baby. At last the lile
hand ceased waving, and the eyes closed. Only from time to time, as he went on
sucking, the baby raised his long, curly eyelashes and peeped at his mother with
wet eyes, that looked black in the twilight. e nurse had le oﬀ fanning, and was
dozing. From above came the peals of the old prince’s voice, and the chuckle of
Katavasov.
"ey have got into talk without me," thought Kiy, "but still it’s vexing that
Kostya’s out. He’s sure to have gone to the bee house again. ough it’s a pity
he’s there so oen, still I’m glad. It distracts his mind. He’s become altogether
happier and beer now than in the spring. He used to be so gloomy and worried
that I felt frightened for him. And how absurd he is!" she whispered, smiling.
She knew what worried her husband. It was his unbelief. Although, if she
had been asked whether she supposed that in the future life, if he did not believe,
he would be damned, she would have had to admit that he would be damned, his
unbelief did not cause her unhappiness. And she, confessing that for an unbeliever
there can be no salvation, and loving her husband’s soul more than anything in the
world, thought with a smile of his unbelief, and told herself that he was absurd.
"What does he keep reading philosophy of some sort for all this year?" she
wondered. "If it’s all wrien in those books, he can understand them. If it’s all
wrong, why does he read them? He says himself that he would like to believe.
en why is it he doesn’t believe? Surely from his thinking so much? And he
thinks so much from being solitary. He’s always alone, alone. He can’t talk about
it all to us. I fancy he’ll be glad of these visitors, especially Katavasov. He likes
discussions with them," she thought, and passed instantly to the consideration of
where it would be more convenient to put Katavasov, to sleep alone or to share
Sergey Ivanovitch’s room. And then an idea suddenly struck her, which made her
shudder and even disturb Mitya, who glanced severely at her. "I do believe the
laundress hasn’t sent the washing yet, and all the best sheets are in use. If I don’t
see to it, Agafea Mihalovna will give Sergey Ivanovitch the wrong sheets," and at
the very idea of this the blood rushed to Kiy’s face.

dccii
"Yes, I will arrange it," she decided, and going back to her former thoughts,
she remembered that some spiritual question of importance had been interrupted,
and she began to recall what. "Yes, Kostya, an unbeliever," she thought again with
a smile.
"Well, an unbeliever then! Beer let him always be one than like Madame
Stahl, or what I tried to be in those days abroad. No, he won’t ever sham anything."
And a recent instance of his goodness rose vividly to her mind. A fortnight
ago a penitent leer had come from Stepan Arkadyevitch to Dolly. He besought
her to save his honor, to sell her estate to pay his debts. Dolly was in despair,
she detested her husband, despised him, pitied him, resolved on a separation,
resolved to refuse, but ended by agreeing to sell part of her property. Aer that,
with an irrepressible smile of tenderness, Kiy recalled her husband’s shamefaced
embarrassment, his repeated awkward eﬀorts to approach the subject, and how
at last, having thought of the one means of helping Dolly without wounding her
pride, he had suggested to Kiy—what had not occurred to her before—that she
should give up her share of the property.
"He an unbeliever indeed! With his heart, his dread of oﬀending anyone,
even a child! Everything for others, nothing for himself. Sergey Ivanovitch simply
considers it as Kostya’s duty to be his steward. And it’s the same with his sister.
Now Dolly and her children are under his guardianship; all these peasants who
come to him every day, as though he were bound to be at their service."
"Yes, only be like your father, only like him," she said, handing Mitya over
to the nurse, and puing her lips to his cheek.

Chapter 
Ever since, by his beloved brother’s deathbed, Levin had ﬁrst glanced into the
questions of life and death in the light of these new convictions, as he called
them, which had during the period from his twentieth to his thirty-fourth year imperceptibly replaced his childish and youthful beliefs—he had been stricken with
horror, not so much of death, as of life, without any knowledge of whence, and
why, and how, and what it was. e physical organization, its decay, the indestructibility of maer, the law of the conservation of energy, evolution, were the
words which usurped the place of his old belief. ese words and the ideas associated with them were very well for intellectual purposes. But for life they yielded
nothing, and Levin felt suddenly like a man who has changed his warm fur cloak
for a muslin garment, and going for the ﬁrst time into the frost is immediately
convinced, not by reason, but by his whole nature that he is as good as naked, and
that he must infallibly perish miserably.

dcciii
From that moment, though he did not distinctly face it, and still went on
living as before, Levin had never lost this sense of terror at his lack of knowledge.
He vaguely felt, too, that what he called his new convictions were not
merely lack of knowledge, but that they were part of a whole order of ideas, in
which no knowledge of what he needed was possible.
At ﬁrst, marriage, with the new joys and duties bound up with it, had completely crowded out these thoughts. But of late, while he was staying in Moscow
aer his wife’s conﬁnement, with nothing to do, the question that clamored for
solution had more and more oen, more and more insistently, haunted Levin’s
mind.
e question was summed up for him thus: "If I do not accept the answers
Christianity gives to the problems of my life, what answers do I accept?" And in
the whole arsenal of his convictions, so far from ﬁnding any satisfactory answers,
he was uerly unable to ﬁnd anything at all like an answer.
He was in the position of a man seeking food in toy shops and tool shops.
Instinctively, unconsciously, with every book, with every conversation,
with every man he met, he was on the lookout for light on these questions and
their solution.
What puzzled and distracted him above everything was that the majority
of men of his age and circle had, like him, exchanged their old beliefs for the
same new convictions, and yet saw nothing to lament in this, and were perfectly
satisﬁed and serene. So that, apart from the principal question, Levin was tortured
by other questions too. Were these people sincere? he asked himself, or were
they playing a part? or was it that they understood the answers science gave to
these problems in some diﬀerent, clearer sense than he did? And he assiduously
studied both these men’s opinions and the books which treated of these scientiﬁc
explanations.
One fact he had found out since these questions had engrossed his mind, was
that he had been quite wrong in supposing from the recollections of the circle
of his young days at college, that religion had outlived its day, and that it was
now practically non-existent. All the people nearest to him who were good in
their lives were believers. e old prince, and Lvov, whom he liked so much, and
Sergey Ivanovitch, and all the women believed, and his wife believed as simply
as he had believed in his earliest childhood, and ninety-nine hundredths of the
Russian people, all the working people for whose life he felt the deepest respect,
believed.
Another fact of which he became convinced, aer reading many scientiﬁc
books, was that the men who shared his views had no other construction to put on
them, and that they gave no explanation of the questions which he felt he could
not live without answering, but simply ignored their existence and aempted to

dcciv
explain other questions of no possible interest to him, such as the evolution of
organisms, the materialistic theory of consciousness, and so forth.
Moreover, during his wife’s conﬁnement, something had happened that
seemed extraordinary to him. He, an unbeliever, had fallen into praying, and
at the moment he prayed, he believed. But that moment had passed, and he could
not make his state of mind at that moment ﬁt into the rest of his life.
He could not admit that at that moment he knew the truth, and that now he
was wrong; for as soon as he began thinking calmly about it, it all fell to pieces.
He could not admit that he was mistaken then, for his spiritual condition then
was precious to him, and to admit that it was a proof of weakness would have
been to desecrate those moments. He was miserably divided against himself, and
strained all his spiritual forces to the utmost to escape from this condition.

Chapter 
ese doubts freed and harassed him, growing weaker or stronger from time to
time, but never leaving him. He read and thought, and the more he read and the
more he thought, the further he felt from the aim he was pursuing.
Of late in Moscow and in the country, since he had become convinced that
he would ﬁnd no solution in the materialists, he had read and re-read thoroughly
Plato, Spinoza, Kant, Schelling, Hegel, and Schopenhauer, the philosophers who
gave a non-materialistic explanation of life.
eir ideas seemed to him fruitful when he was reading or was himself
seeking arguments to refute other theories, especially those of the materialists;
but as soon as he began to read or sought for himself a solution of problems,
the same thing always happened. As long as he followed the ﬁxed deﬁnition of
obscure words such as spirit, will, freedom, essence, purposely leing himself go
into the snare of words the philosophers set for him, he seemed to comprehend
something. But he had only to forget the artiﬁcial train of reasoning, and to turn
from life itself to what had satisﬁed him while thinking in accordance with the
ﬁxed deﬁnitions, and all this artiﬁcial ediﬁce fell to pieces at once like a house of
cards, and it became clear that the ediﬁce had been built up out of those transposed
words, apart from anything in life more important than reason.
At one time, reading Schopenhauer, he put in place of his will the word love,
and for a couple of days this new philosophy charmed him, till he removed a lile
away from it. But then, when he turned from life itself to glance at it again, it fell
away too, and proved to be the same muslin garment with no warmth in it.
His brother Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to read the theological works
of Homiakov. Levin read the second volume of Homiakov’s works, and in spite

dccv
of the elegant, epigrammatic, argumentative style which at ﬁrst repelled him, he
was impressed by the doctrine of the church he found in them. He was struck at
ﬁrst by the idea that the apprehension of divine truths had not been vouchsafed
to man, but to a corporation of men bound together by love—to the church. What
delighted him was the thought how much easier it was to believe in a still existing
living church, embracing all the beliefs of men, and having God at its head, and
therefore holy and infallible, and from it to accept the faith in God, in the creation,
the fall, the redemption, than to begin with God, a mysterious, far-away God,
the creation, etc. But aerwards, on reading a Catholic writer’s history of the
church, and then a Greek orthodox writer’s history of the church, and seeing that
the two churches, in their very conception infallible, each deny the authority of
the other, Homiakov’s doctrine of the church lost all its charm for him, and this
ediﬁce crumbled into dust like the philosophers’ ediﬁces.
All that spring he was not himself, and went through fearful moments of
horror.
"Without knowing what I am and why I am here, life’s impossible; and that
I can’t know, and so I can’t live," Levin said to himself.
"In inﬁnite time, in inﬁnite maer, in inﬁnite space, is formed a bubbleorganism, and that bubble lasts a while and bursts, and that bubble is Me."
It was an agonizing error, but it was the sole logical result of ages of human
thought in that direction.
is was the ultimate belief on which all the systems elaborated by human
thought in almost all their ramiﬁcations rested. It was the prevalent conviction,
and of all other explanations Levin had unconsciously, not knowing when or how,
chosen it, as anyway the clearest, and made it his own.
But it was not merely a falsehood, it was the cruel jeer of some wicked
power, some evil, hateful power, to whom one could not submit.
He must escape from this power. And the means of escape every man had
in his own hands. He had but to cut short this dependence on evil. And there was
one means—death.
And Levin, a happy father and husband, in perfect health, was several times
so near suicide that he hid the cord that he might not be tempted to hang himself,
and was afraid to go out with his gun for fear of shooting himself.
But Levin did not shoot himself, and did not hang himself; he went on living.

Chapter 
When Levin thought what he was and what he was living for, he could ﬁnd no
answer to the questions and was reduced to despair, but he le oﬀ questioning

dccvi
himself about it. It seemed as though he knew both what he was and for what
he was living, for he acted and lived resolutely and without hesitation. Indeed,
in these laer days he was far more decided and unhesitating in life than he had
ever been.
When he went back to the country at the beginning of June, he went back
also to his usual pursuits. e management of the estate, his relations with the
peasants and the neighbors, the care of his household, the management of his
sister’s and brother’s property, of which he had the direction, his relations with
his wife and kindred, the care of his child, and the new bee-keeping hobby he had
taken up that spring, ﬁlled all his time.
ese things occupied him now, not because he justiﬁed them to himself by
any sort of general principles, as he had done in former days; on the contrary,
disappointed by the failure of his former eﬀorts for the general welfare, and too
much occupied with his own thought and the mass of business with which he
was burdened from all sides, he had completely given up thinking of the general
good, and he busied himself with all this work simply because it seemed to him
that he must do what he was doing—that he could not do otherwise. In former
days—almost from childhood, and increasingly up to full manhood—when he had
tried to do anything that would be good for all, for humanity, for Russia, for the
whole village, he had noticed that the idea of it had been pleasant, but the work
itself had always been incoherent, that then he had never had a full conviction
of its absolute necessity, and that the work that had begun by seeming so great,
had grown less and less, till it vanished into nothing. But now, since his marriage,
when he had begun to conﬁne himself more and more to living for himself, though
he experienced no delight at all at the thought of the work he was doing, he felt
a complete conviction of its necessity, saw that it succeeded far beer than in old
days, and that it kept on growing more and more.
Now, involuntarily it seemed, he cut more and more deeply into the soil like
a plough, so that he could not be drawn out without turning aside the furrow.
To live the same family life as his father and forefathers—that is, in the same
condition of culture—and to bring up his children in the same, was incontestably
necessary. It was as necessary as dining when one was hungry. And to do this,
just as it was necessary to cook dinner, it was necessary to keep the mechanism
of agriculture at Pokrovskoe going so as to yield an income. Just as incontestably
as it was necessary to repay a debt was it necessary to keep the property in such
a condition that his son, when he received it as a heritage, would say "thank you"
to his father as Levin had said "thank you" to his grandfather for all he built and
planted. And to do this it was necessary to look aer the land himself, not to let
it, and to breed cale, manure the ﬁelds, and plant timber.
It was impossible not to look aer the aﬀairs of Sergey Ivanovitch, of his

dccvii
sister, of the peasants who came to him for advice and were accustomed to do
so—as impossible as to ﬂing down a child one is carrying in one’s arms. It was
necessary to look aer the comfort of his sister-in-law and her children, and of
his wife and baby, and it was impossible not to spend with them at least a short
time each day.
And all this, together with shooting and his new bee-keeping, ﬁlled up the
whole of Levin’s life, which had no meaning at all for him, when he began to
think.
But besides knowing thoroughly what he had to do, Levin knew in just the
same way how he had to do it all, and what was more important than the rest.
He knew he must hire laborers as cheaply as possible; but to hire men under
bond, paying them in advance at less than the current rate of wages, was what he
must not do, even though it was very proﬁtable. Selling straw to the peasants in
times of scarcity of provender was what he might do, even though he felt sorry
for them; but the tavern and the pothouse must be put down, though they were
a source of income. Felling timber must be punished as severely as possible, but
he could not exact forfeits for cale being driven onto his ﬁelds; and though it
annoyed the keeper and made the peasants not afraid to graze their cale on his
land, he could not keep their cale as a punishment.
To Pyotr, who was paying a money-lender  per cent. a month, he must
lend a sum of money to set him free. But he could not let oﬀ peasants who did
not pay their rent, nor let them fall into arrears. It was impossible to overlook
the baili’s not having mown the meadows and leing the hay spoil; and it was
equally impossible to mow those acres where a young copse had been planted. It
was impossible to excuse a laborer who had gone home in the busy season because
his father was dying, however sorry he might feel for him, and he must subtract
from his pay those costly months of idleness. But it was impossible not to allow
monthly rations to the old servants who were of no use for anything.
Levin knew that when he got home he must ﬁrst of all go to his wife, who
was unwell, and that the peasants who had been waiting for three hours to see
him could wait a lile longer. He knew too that, regardless of all the pleasure he
felt in taking a swarm, he must forego that pleasure, and leave the old man to see
to the bees alone, while he talked to the peasants who had come aer him to the
bee-house.
Whether he were acting rightly or wrongly he did not know, and far from
trying to prove that he was, nowadays he avoided all thought or talk about it.
Reasoning had brought him to doubt, and prevented him from seeing what
he ought to do and what he ought not. When he did not think, but simply lived,
he was continually aware of the presence of an infallible judge in his soul, determining which of two possible courses of action was the beer and which was the

dccviii
worse, and as soon as he did not act rightly, he was at once aware of it.
So he lived, not knowing and not seeing any chance of knowing what he
was and what he was living for, and harassed at this lack of knowledge to such a
point that he was afraid of suicide, and yet ﬁrmly laying down his own individual
deﬁnite path in life.

Chapter 
e day on which Sergey Ivanovitch came to Pokrovskoe was one of Levin’s most
painful days. It was the very busiest working time, when all the peasantry show
an extraordinary intensity of self-sacriﬁce in labor, such as is never shown in any
other conditions of life, and would be highly esteemed if the men who showed
these qualities themselves thought highly of them, and if it were not repeated
every year, and if the results of this intense labor were not so simple.
To reap and bind the rye and oats and to carry it, to mow the meadows, turn
over the fallows, thrash the seed and sow the winter corn—all this seems so simple
and ordinary; but to succeed in geing through it all everyone in the village, from
the old man to the young child, must toil incessantly for three or four weeks, three
times as hard as usual, living on rye-beer, onions, and black bread, thrashing and
carrying the sheaves at night, and not giving more than two or three hours in the
twenty-four to sleep. And every year this is done all over Russia.
Having lived the greater part of his life in the country and in the closest
relations with the peasants, Levin always felt in this busy time that he was infected
by this general quickening of energy in the people.
In the early morning he rode over to the ﬁrst sowing of the rye, and to the
oats, which were being carried to the stacks, and returning home at the time his
wife and sister-in-law were geing up, he drank coﬀee with them and walked to
the farm, where a new thrashing machine was to be set working to get ready the
seed-corn.
He was standing in the cool granary, still fragrant with the leaves of the
hazel branches interlaced on the freshly peeled aspen beams of the new thatch
roof. He gazed through the open door in which the dry bier dust of the thrashing
whirled and played, at the grass of the thrashing ﬂoor in the sunlight and the fresh
straw that had been brought in from the barn, then at the speckly-headed, whitebreasted swallows that ﬂew chirping in under the roof and, ﬂuering their wings,
seled in the crevices of the doorway, then at the peasants bustling in the dark,
dusty barn, and he thought strange thoughts.
"Why is it all being done?" he thought. "Why am I standing here, making
them work? What are they all so busy for, trying to show their zeal before me?

dccix
What is that old Matrona, my old friend, toiling for? (I doctored her, when the
beam fell on her in the ﬁre)" he thought, looking at a thin old woman who was
raking up the grain, moving painfully with her bare, sun-blackened feet over the
uneven, rough ﬂoor. "en she recovered, but today or tomorrow or in ten years
she won’t; they’ll bury her, and nothing will be le either of her or of that smart
girl in the red jacket, who with that skillful, so action shakes the ears out of their
husks. ey’ll bury her and this piebald horse, and very soon too," he thought,
gazing at the heavily moving, panting horse that kept walking up the wheel that
turned under him. "And they will bury her and Fyodor the thrasher with his curly
beard full of chaﬀ and his shirt torn on his white shoulders—they will bury him.
He’s untying the sheaves, and giving orders, and shouting to the women, and
quickly seing straight the strap on the moving wheel. And what’s more, it’s not
them alone—me they’ll bury too, and nothing will be le. What for?"
He thought this, and at the same time looked at his watch to reckon how
much they thrashed in an hour. He wanted to know this so as to judge by it the
task to set for the day.
"It’ll soon be one, and they’re only beginning the third sheaf," thought Levin.
He went up to the man that was feeding the machine, and shouting over the roar
of the machine he told him to put it in more slowly. "You put in too much at a
time, Fyodor. Do you see—it gets choked, that’s why it isn’t geing on. Do it
evenly."
Fyodor, black with the dust that clung to his moist face, shouted something
in response, but still went on doing it as Levin did not want him to.
Levin, going up to the machine, moved Fyodor aside, and began feeding the
corn in himself. Working on till the peasants’ dinner hour, which was not long in
coming, he went out of the barn with Fyodor and fell into talk with him, stopping
beside a neat yellow sheaf of rye laid on the thrashing ﬂoor for seed.
Fyodor came from a village at some distance from the one in which Levin
had once alloed land to his cooperative association. Now it had been let to a
former house porter.
Levin talked to Fyodor about this land and asked whether Platon, a well-todo peasant of good character belonging to the same village, would not take the
land for the coming year.
"It’s a high rent; it wouldn’t pay Platon, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," answered
the peasant, picking the ears oﬀ his sweat-drenched shirt.
"But how does Kirillov make it pay?"
"Mituh!" (so the peasant called the house porter, in a tone of contempt),
"you may be sure he’ll make it pay, Konstantin Dmitrievitch! He’ll get his share,
however he has to squeeze to get it! He’s no mercy on a Christian. But Uncle
Fokanitch" (so he called the old peasant Platon), "do you suppose he’d ﬂay the

dccx
skin oﬀ a man? Where there’s debt, he’ll let anyone oﬀ. And he’ll not wring the
last penny out. He’s a man too."
"But why will he let anyone o?"
"Oh, well, of course, folks are diﬀerent. One man lives for his own wants
and nothing else, like Mituh, he only thinks of ﬁlling his belly, but Fokanitch is a
righteous man. He lives for his soul. He does not forget God."
"How thinks of God? How does he live for his soul?" Levin almost shouted.
"Why, to be sure, in truth, in God’s way. Folks are diﬀerent. Take you now,
you wouldn’t wrong a man…."
"Yes, yes, good-bye!" said Levin, breathless with excitement, and turning
round he took his stick and walked quickly away towards home. At the peasant’s
words that Fokanitch lived for his soul, in truth, in God’s way, undeﬁned but
signiﬁcant ideas seemed to burst out as though they had been locked up, and all
striving towards one goal, they thronged whirling through his head, blinding him
with their light.

Chapter 
Levin strode along the highroad, absorbed not so much in his thoughts (he could
not yet disentangle them) as in his spiritual condition, unlike anything he had
experienced before.
e words uered by the peasant had acted on his soul like an electric shock,
suddenly transforming and combining into a single whole the whole swarm of
disjointed, impotent, separate thoughts that incessantly occupied his mind. ese
thoughts had unconsciously been in his mind even when he was talking about the
land.
He was aware of something new in his soul, and joyfully tested this new
thing, not yet knowing what it was.
"Not living for his own wants, but for God? For what God? And could one
say anything more senseless than what he said? He said that one must not live for
one’s own wants, that is, that one must not live for what we understand, what we
are aracted by, what we desire, but must live for something incomprehensible,
for God, whom no one can understand nor even deﬁne. What of it? Didn’t I
understand those senseless words of Fyodor’s? And understanding them, did I
doubt of their truth? Did I think them stupid, obscure, inexact? No, I understood
him, and exactly as he understands the words. I understood them more fully and
clearly than I understand anything in life, and never in my life have I doubted nor
can I doubt about it. And not only I, but everyone, the whole world understands
nothing fully but this, and about this only they have no doubt and are always

dccxi
agreed.
"And I looked out for miracles, complained that I did not see a miracle which
would convince me. A material miracle would have persuaded me. And here is
a miracle, the sole miracle possible, continually existing, surrounding me on all
sides, and I never noticed it!
"Fyodor says that Kirillov lives for his belly. at’s comprehensible and
rational. All of us as rational beings can’t do anything else but live for our belly.
And all of a sudden the same Fyodor says that one mustn’t live for one’s belly, but
must live for truth, for God, and at a hint I understand him! And I and millions
of men, men who lived ages ago and men living now—peasants, the poor in spirit
and the learned, who have thought and wrien about it, in their obscure words
saying the same thing—we are all agreed about this one thing: what we must
live for and what is good. I and all men have only one ﬁrm, incontestable, clear
knowledge, and that knowledge cannot be explained by the reason—it is outside
it, and has no causes and can have no eﬀects.
"If goodness has causes, it is not goodness; if it has eﬀects, a reward, it is
not goodness either. So goodness is outside the chain of cause and eﬀect.
"And yet I know it, and we all know it.
"What could be a greater miracle than that?
"Can I have found the solution of it all? can my suﬀerings be over?" thought
Levin, striding along the dusty road, not noticing the heat nor his weariness, and
experiencing a sense of relief from prolonged suﬀering. is feeling was so delicious that it seemed to him incredible. He was breathless with emotion and
incapable of going farther; he turned oﬀ the road into the forest and lay down in
the shade of an aspen on the uncut grass. He took his hat oﬀ his hot head and lay
propped on his elbow in the lush, feathery, woodland grass.
"Yes, I must make it clear to myself and understand," he thought, looking
intently at the untrampled grass before him, and following the movements of a
green beetle, advancing along a blade of couch-grass and liing up in its progress
a leaf of goat-weed. "What have I discovered?" he asked himself, bending aside
the leaf of goat-weed out of the beetle’s way and twisting another blade of grass
above for the beetle to cross over onto it. "What is it makes me glad? What have
I discovered?
"I have discovered nothing. I have only found out what I knew. I understand
the force that in the past gave me life, and now too gives me life. I have been set
free from falsity, I have found the Master.
"Of old I used to say that in my body, that in the body of this grass and of
this beetle (there, she didn’t care for the grass, she’s opened her wings and ﬂown
away), there was going on a transformation of maer in accordance with physical,
chemical, and physiological laws. And in all of us, as well as in the aspens and

dccxii
the clouds and the misty patches, there was a process of evolution. Evolution
from what? into what?—Eternal evolution and struggle…. As though there could
be any sort of tendency and struggle in the eternal! And I was astonished that
in spite of the utmost eﬀort of thought along that road I could not discover the
meaning of life, the meaning of my impulses and yearnings. Now I say that I
know the meaning of my life: ‘To live for God, for my soul.’ And this meaning, in
spite of its clearness, is mysterious and marvelous. Such, indeed, is the meaning
of everything existing. Yes, pride," he said to himself, turning over on his stomach
and beginning to tie a noose of blades of grass, trying not to break them.
"And not merely pride of intellect, but dulness of intellect. And most of all,
the deceitfulness; yes, the deceitfulness of intellect. e cheating knavishness of
intellect, that’s it," he said to himself.
And he brieﬂy went through, mentally, the whole course of his ideas during
the last two years, the beginning of which was the clear confronting of death at
the sight of his dear brother hopelessly ill.
en, for the ﬁrst time, grasping that for every man, and himself too, there
was nothing in store but suﬀering, death, and forgetfulness, he had made up his
mind that life was impossible like that, and that he must either interpret life so that
it would not present itself to him as the evil jest of some devil, or shoot himself.
But he had not done either, but had gone on living, thinking, and feeling,
and had even at that very time married, and had had many joys and had been
happy, when he was not thinking of the meaning of his life.
What did this mean? It meant that he had been living rightly, but thinking
wrongly.
He had lived (without being aware of it) on those spiritual truths that he
had sucked in with his mother’s milk, but he had thought, not merely without
recognition of these truths, but studiously ignoring them.
Now it was clear to him that he could only live by virtue of the beliefs in
which he had been brought up.
"What should I have been, and how should I have spent my life, if I had
not had these beliefs, if I had not known that I must live for God and not for my
own desires? I should have robbed and lied and killed. Nothing of what makes
the chief happiness of my life would have existed for me." And with the utmost
stretch of imagination he could not conceive the brutal creature he would have
been himself, if he had not known what he was living for.
"I looked for an answer to my question. And thought could not give an
answer to my question—it is incommensurable with my question. e answer
has been given me by life itself, in my knowledge of what is right and what is
wrong. And that knowledge I did not arrive at in any way, it was given to me as
to all men, given, because I could not have got it from anywhere.

dccxiii
"Where could I have got it? By reason could I have arrived at knowing that
I must love my neighbor and not oppress him? I was told that in my childhood,
and I believed it gladly, for they told me what was already in my soul. But who
discovered it? Not reason. Reason discovered the struggle for existence, and the
law that requires us to oppress all who hinder the satisfaction of our desires. at
is the deduction of reason. But loving one’s neighbor reason could never discover,
because it’s irrational."

Chapter 
And Levin remembered a scene he had lately witnessed between Dolly and her
children. e children, le to themselves, had begun cooking raspberries over the
candles and squirting milk into each other’s mouths with a syringe. eir mother,
catching them at these pranks, began reminding them in Levin’s presence of the
trouble their mischief gave to the grown-up people, and that this trouble was all
for their sake, and that if they smashed the cups they would have nothing to drink
their tea out of, and that if they wasted the milk, they would have nothing to eat,
and die of hunger.
And Levin had been struck by the passive, weary incredulity with which
the children heard what their mother said to them. ey were simply annoyed
that their amusing play had been interrupted, and did not believe a word of what
their mother was saying. ey could not believe it indeed, for they could not take
in the immensity of all they habitually enjoyed, and so could not conceive that
what they were destroying was the very thing they lived by.
"at all comes of itself," they thought, "and there’s nothing interesting or
important about it because it has always been so, and always will be so. And it’s
all always the same. We’ve no need to think about that, it’s all ready. But we want
to invent something of our own, and new. So we thought of puing raspberries
in a cup, and cooking them over a candle, and squirting milk straight into each
other’s mouths. at’s fun, and something new, and not a bit worse than drinking
out of cups."
"Isn’t it just the same that we do, that I did, searching by the aid of reason
for the signiﬁcance of the forces of nature and the meaning of the life of man?"
he thought.
"And don’t all the theories of philosophy do the same, trying by the path of
thought, which is strange and not natural to man, to bring him to a knowledge of
what he has known long ago, and knows so certainly that he could not live at all
without it? Isn’t it distinctly to be seen in the development of each philosopher’s
theory, that he knows what is the chief signiﬁcance of life beforehand, just as

dccxiv
positively as the peasant Fyodor, and not a bit more clearly than he, and is simply
trying by a dubious intellectual path to come back to what everyone knows?
"Now then, leave the children to themselves to get things alone and make
their crockery, get the milk from the cows, and so on. Would they be naughty
then? Why, they’d die of hunger! Well, then, leave us with our passions and
thoughts, without any idea of the one God, of the Creator, or without any idea of
what is right, without any idea of moral evil.
"Just try and build up anything without those ideas!
"We only try to destroy them, because we’re spiritually provided for. Exactly like the children!
"Whence have I that joyful knowledge, shared with the peasant, that alone
gives peace to my soul? Whence did I get it?
"Brought up with an idea of God, a Christian, my whole life ﬁlled with the
spiritual blessings Christianity has given me, full of them, and living on those
blessings, like the children I did not understand them, and destroy, that is try to
destroy, what I live by. And as soon as an important moment of life comes, like
the children when they are cold and hungry, I turn to Him, and even less than the
children when their mother scolds them for their childish mischief, do I feel that
my childish eﬀorts at wanton madness are reckoned against me.
"Yes, what I know, I know not by reason, but it has been given to me, revealed to me, and I know it with my heart, by faith in the chief thing taught by
the church.
"e church! the church!" Levin repeated to himself. He turned over on the
other side, and leaning on his elbow, fell to gazing into the distance at a herd of
cale crossing over to the river.
"But can I believe in all the church teaches?" he thought, trying himself, and
thinking of everything that could destroy his present peace of mind. Intentionally he recalled all those doctrines of the church which had always seemed most
strange and had always been a stumbling block to him.
"e Creation? But how did I explain existence? By existence? By nothing?
e devil and sin. But how do I explain evil?… e atonement?…
"But I know nothing, nothing, and I can know nothing but what has been
told to me and all men."
And it seemed to him that there was not a single article of faith of the church
which could destroy the chief thing—faith in God, in goodness, as the one goal of
man’s destiny.
Under every article of faith of the church could be put the faith in the service
of truth instead of one’s desires. And each doctrine did not simply leave that
faith unshaken, each doctrine seemed essential to complete that great miracle,
continually manifest upon earth, that made it possible for each man and millions

dccxv
of diﬀerent sorts of men, wise men and imbeciles, old men and children—all men,
peasants, Lvov, Kiy, beggars and kings to understand perfectly the same one
thing, and to build up thereby that life of the soul which alone is worth living,
and which alone is precious to us.
Lying on his back, he gazed up now into the high, cloudless sky. "Do I not
know that that is inﬁnite space, and that it is not a round arch? But, however I
screw up my eyes and strain my sight, I cannot see it not round and not bounded,
and in spite of my knowing about inﬁnite space, I am incontestably right when I
see a solid blue dome, and more right than when I strain my eyes to see beyond
it."
Levin ceased thinking, and only, as it were, listened to mysterious voices
that seemed talking joyfully and earnestly within him.
"Can this be faith?" he thought, afraid to believe in his happiness. "My God,
I thank ee!" he said, gulping down his sobs, and with both hands brushing away
the tears that ﬁlled his eyes.

Chapter 
Levin looked before him and saw a herd of cale, then he caught sight of his trap
with Raven in the shas, and the coachman, who, driving up to the herd, said
something to the herdsman. en he heard the rale of the wheels and the snort
of the sleek horse close by him. But he was so buried in his thoughts that he did
not even wonder why the coachman had come for him.
He only thought of that when the coachman had driven quite up to him
and shouted to him. "e mistress sent me. Your brother has come, and some
gentleman with him."
Levin got into the trap and took the reins. As though just roused out of sleep,
for a long while Levin could not collect his faculties. He stared at the sleek horse
ﬂecked with lather between his haunches and on his neck, where the harness
rubbed, stared at Ivan the coachman siing beside him, and remembered that he
was expecting his brother, thought that his wife was most likely uneasy at his long
absence, and tried to guess who was the visitor who had come with his brother.
And his brother and his wife and the unknown guest seemed to him now quite
diﬀerent from before. He fancied that now his relations with all men would be
diﬀerent.
"With my brother there will be none of that aloofness there always used to
be between us, there will be no disputes; with Kiy there shall never be quarrels;
with the visitor, whoever he may be, I will be friendly and nice; with the servants,
with Ivan, it will all be diﬀerent."

dccxvi
Pulling the stiﬀ rein and holding in the good horse that snorted with impatience and seemed begging to be let go, Levin looked round at Ivan siing beside
him, not knowing what to do with his unoccupied hand, continually pressing
down his shirt as it puﬀed out, and he tried to ﬁnd something to start a conversation about with him. He would have said that Ivan had pulled the saddle-girth up
too high, but that was like blame, and he longed for friendly, warm talk. Nothing
else occurred to him.
"Your honor must keep to the right and mind that stump," said the coachman,
pulling the rein Levin held.
"Please don’t touch and don’t teach me!" said Levin, angered by this interference. Now, as always, interference made him angry, and he felt sorrowfully
at once how mistaken had been his supposition that his spiritual condition could
immediately change him in contact with reality.
He was not a quarter of a mile from home when he saw Grisha and Tanya
running to meet him.
"Uncle Kostya! mamma’s coming, and grandfather, and Sergey Ivanovitch,
and someone else," they said, clambering up into the trap.
"Who is he?"
"An awfully terrible person! And he does like this with his arms," said Tanya,
geing up in the trap and mimicking Katavasov.
"Old or young?" asked Levin, laughing, reminded of someone, he did not
know whom, by Tanya’s performance.
"Oh, I hope it’s not a tiresome person!" thought Levin.
As soon as he turned, at a bend in the road, and saw the party coming,
Levin recognized Katavasov in a straw hat, walking along swinging his arms just
as Tanya had shown him. Katavasov was very fond of discussing metaphysics,
having derived his notions from natural science writers who had never studied
metaphysics, and in Moscow Levin had had many arguments with him of late.
And one of these arguments, in which Katavasov had obviously considered
that he came oﬀ victorious, was the ﬁrst thing Levin thought of as he recognized
him.
"No, whatever I do, I won’t argue and give uerance to my ideas lightly," he
thought.
Geing out of the trap and greeting his brother and Katavasov, Levin asked
about his wife.
"She has taken Mitya to Kolok" (a copse near the house). "She meant to have
him out there because it’s so hot indoors," said Dolly. Levin had always advised his
wife not to take the baby to the wood, thinking it unsafe, and he was not pleased
to hear this.
"She rushes about from place to place with him," said the prince, smiling. "I

dccxvii
advised her to try puing him in the ice cellar."
"She meant to come to the bee house. She thought you would be there. We
are going there," said Dolly.
"Well, and what are you doing?" said Sergey Ivanovitch, falling back from
the rest and walking beside him.
"Oh, nothing special. Busy as usual with the land," answered Levin. "Well,
and what about you? Come for long? We have been expecting you for such a
long time."
"Only for a fortnight. I’ve a great deal to do in Moscow."
At these words the brothers’ eyes met, and Levin, in spite of the desire he
always had, stronger than ever just now, to be on aﬀectionate and still more open
terms with his brother, felt an awkwardness in looking at him. He dropped his
eyes and did not know what to say.
Casting over the subjects of conversation that would be pleasant to Sergey
Ivanovitch, and would keep him oﬀ the subject of the Servian war and the Slavonic
question, at which he had hinted by the allusion to what he had to do in Moscow,
Levin began to talk of Sergey Ivanovitch’s book.
"Well, have there been reviews of your book?" he asked.
Sergey Ivanovitch smiled at the intentional character of the question.
"No one is interested in that now, and I less than anyone," he said. "Just look,
Darya Alexandrovna, we shall have a shower," he added, pointing with a sunshade
at the white rain clouds that showed above the aspen tree-tops.
And these words were enough to re-establish again between the brothers
that tone—hardly hostile, but chilly—which Levin had been so longing to avoid.
Levin went up to Katavasov.
"It was jolly of you to make up your mind to come," he said to him.
"I’ve been meaning to a long while. Now we shall have some discussion,
we’ll see to that. Have you been reading Spencer?"
"No, I’ve not ﬁnished reading him," said Levin. "But I don’t need him now."
"How’s that? that’s interesting. Why so?"
"I mean that I’m fully convinced that the solution of the problems that interest me I shall never ﬁnd in him and his like. Now…"
But Katavasov’s serene and good-humored expression suddenly struck him,
and he felt such tenderness for his own happy mood, which he was unmistakably
disturbing by this conversation, that he remembered his resolution and stopped
short.
"But we’ll talk later on," he added. "If we’re going to the bee house, it’s this
way, along this lile path," he said, addressing them all.
Going along the narrow path to a lile uncut meadow covered on one side
with thick clumps of brilliant heart’s-ease among which stood up here and there

dccxviii
tall, dark green tus of hellebore, Levin seled his guests in the dense, cool shade
of the young aspens on a bench and some stumps purposely put there for visitors
to the bee house who might be afraid of the bees, and he went oﬀ himself to the
hut to get bread, cucumbers, and fresh honey, to regale them with.
Trying to make his movements as deliberate as possible, and listening to the
bees that buzzed more and more frequently past him, he walked along the lile
path to the hut. In the very entry one bee hummed angrily, caught in his beard,
but he carefully extricated it. Going into the shady outer room, he took down
from the wall his veil, that hung on a peg, and puing it on, and thrusting his
hands into his pockets, he went into the fenced-in bee-garden, where there stood
in the midst of a closely mown space in regular rows, fastened with bast on posts,
all the hives he knew so well, the old stocks, each with its own history, and along
the fences the younger swarms hived that year. In front of the openings of the
hives, it made his eyes giddy to watch the bees and drones whirling round and
round about the same spot, while among them the working bees ﬂew in and out
with spoils or in search of them, always in the same direction into the wood to
the ﬂowering lime trees and back to the hives.
His ears were ﬁlled with the incessant hum in various notes, now the busy
hum of the working bee ﬂying quickly oﬀ, then the blaring of the lazy drone, and
the excited buzz of the bees on guard protecting their property from the enemy
and preparing to sting. On the farther side of the fence the old bee-keeper was
shaving a hoop for a tub, and he did not see Levin. Levin stood still in the midst
of the beehives and did not call him.
He was glad of a chance to be alone to recover from the inﬂuence of ordinary
actual life, which had already depressed his happy mood. He thought that he had
already had time to lose his temper with Ivan, to show coolness to his brother,
and to talk ﬂippantly with Katavasov.
"Can it have been only a momentary mood, and will it pass and leave no
trace?" he thought. But the same instant, going back to his mood, he felt with
delight that something new and important had happened to him. Real life had
only for a time overcast the spiritual peace he had found, but it was still untouched
within him.
Just as the bees, whirling round him, now menacing him and distracting his
aention, prevented him from enjoying complete physical peace, forced him to
restrain his movements to avoid them, so had the pey cares that had swarmed
about him from the moment he got into the trap restricted his spiritual freedom;
but that lasted only so long as he was among them. Just as his bodily strength
was still unaﬀected, in spite of the bees, so too was the spiritual strength that he
had just become aware of.

dccxix

Chapter 
"Do you know, Kostya, with whom Sergey Ivanovitch traveled on his way here?"
said Dolly, doling out cucumbers and honey to the children; "with Vronsky! He’s
going to Servia."
"And not alone; he’s taking a squadron out with him at his own expense,"
said Katavasov.
"at’s the right thing for him," said Levin. "Are volunteers still going out
then?" he added, glancing at Sergey Ivanovitch.
Sergey Ivanovitch did not answer. He was carefully with a blunt knife getting a live bee covered with sticky honey out of a cup full of white honeycomb.
"I should think so! You should have seen what was going on at the station
yesterday!" said Katavasov, biting with a juicy sound into a cucumber.
"Well, what is one to make of it? For mercy’s sake, do explain to me, Sergey
Ivanovitch, where are all those volunteers going, whom are they ﬁghting with?"
asked the old prince, unmistakably taking up a conversation that had sprung up
in Levin’s absence.
"With the Turks," Sergey Ivanovitch answered, smiling serenely, as he extricated the bee, dark with honey and helplessly kicking, and put it with the knife
on a stout aspen leaf.
"But who has declared war on the Turks?—Ivan Ivanovitch Ragozov and
Countess Lidia Ivanovna, assisted by Madame Stahl?"
"No one has declared war, but people sympathize with their neighbors’ sufferings and are eager to help them," said Sergey Ivanovitch.
"But the prince is not speaking of help," said Levin, coming to the assistance
of his father-in-law, "but of war. e prince says that private persons cannot take
part in war without the permission of the government."
"Kostya, mind, that’s a bee! Really, they’ll sting us!" said Dolly, waving
away a wasp.
"But that’s not a bee, it’s a wasp," said Levin.
"Well now, well, what’s your own theory?" Katavasov said to Levin with a
smile, distinctly challenging him to a discussion. "Why have not private persons
the right to do so?"
"Oh, my theory’s this: war is on one side such a beastly, cruel, and awful
thing, that no one man, not to speak of a Christian, can individually take upon
himself the responsibility of beginning wars; that can only be done by a government, which is called upon to do this, and is driven inevitably into war. On
the other hand, both political science and common sense teach us that in maers
of state, and especially in the maer of war, private citizens must forego their
personal individual will."

dccxx
Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had their replies ready, and both began
speaking at the same time.
"But the point is, my dear fellow, that there may be cases when the government does not carry out the will of the citizens and then the public asserts its
will," said Katavasov.
But evidently Sergey Ivanovitch did not approve of this answer. His brows
contracted at Katavasov’s words and he said something else.
"You don’t put the maer in its true light. ere is no question here of a
declaration of war, but simply the expression of a human Christian feeling. Our
brothers, one with us in religion and in race, are being massacred. Even supposing
they were not our brothers nor fellow-Christians, but simply children, women,
old people, feeling is aroused and Russians go eagerly to help in stopping these
atrocities. Fancy, if you were going along the street and saw drunken men beating
a woman or a child—I imagine you would not stop to inquire whether war had
been declared on the men, but would throw yourself on them, and protect the
victim."
"But I should not kill them," said Levin.
"Yes, you would kill them."
"I don’t know. If I saw that, I might give way to my impulse of the moment,
but I can’t say beforehand. And such a momentary impulse there is not, and there
cannot be, in the case of the oppression of the Slavonic peoples."
"Possibly for you there is not; but for others there is," said Sergey Ivanovitch,
frowning with displeasure. "ere are traditions still extant among the people of
Slavs of the true faith suﬀering under the yoke of the ‘unclean sons of Hagar.’ e
people have heard of the suﬀerings of their brethren and have spoken."
"Perhaps so," said Levin evasively; "but I don’t see it. I’m one of the people
myself, and I don’t feel it."
"Here am I too," said the old prince. "I’ve been staying abroad and reading
the papers, and I must own, up to the time of the Bulgarian atrocities, I couldn’t
make out why it was all the Russians were all of a sudden so fond of their Slavonic
brethren, while I didn’t feel the slightest aﬀection for them. I was very much
upset, thought I was a monster, or that it was the inﬂuence of Carlsbad on me.
But since I have been here, my mind’s been set at rest. I see that there are people
besides me who’re only interested in Russia, and not in their Slavonic brethren.
Here’s Konstantin too."
"Personal opinions mean nothing in such a case," said Sergey Ivanovitch;
"it’s not a maer of personal opinions when all Russia—the whole people—has
expressed its will."
"But excuse me, I don’t see that. e people don’t know anything about it,
if you come to that," said the old prince.

dccxxi
"Oh, papa!… how can you say that? And last Sunday in church?" said Dolly,
listening to the conversation. "Please give me a cloth," she said to the old man,
who was looking at the children with a smile. "Why, it’s not possible that all…"
"But what was it in church on Sunday? e priest had been told to read
that. He read it. ey didn’t understand a word of it. en they were told that
there was to be a collection for a pious object in church; well, they pulled out their
halfpence and gave them, but what for they couldn’t say."
"e people cannot help knowing; the sense of their own destinies is always
in the people, and at such moments as the present that sense ﬁnds uerance," said
Sergey Ivanovitch with conviction, glancing at the old bee-keeper.
e handsome old man, with black grizzled beard and thick silvery hair,
stood motionless, holding a cup of honey, looking down from the height of his tall
ﬁgure with friendly serenity at the gentlefolk, obviously understanding nothing
of their conversation and not caring to understand it.
"at’s so, no doubt," he said, with a signiﬁcant shake of his head at Sergey
Ivanovitch’s words.
"Here, then, ask him. He knows nothing about it and thinks nothing," said
Levin. "Have you heard about the war, Mihalitch?" he said, turning to him. "What
they read in the church? What do you think about it? Ought we to ﬁght for the
Christians?"
"What should we think? Alexander Nikolaevitch our Emperor has thought
for us; he thinks for us indeed in all things. It’s clearer for him to see. Shall I
bring a bit more bread? Give the lile lad some more?" he said addressing Darya
Alexandrovna and pointing to Grisha, who had ﬁnished his crust.
"I don’t need to ask," said Sergey Ivanovitch, "we have seen and are seeing
hundreds and hundreds of people who give up everything to serve a just cause,
come from every part of Russia, and directly and clearly express their thought
and aim. ey bring their halfpence or go themselves and say directly what for.
What does it mean?"
"It means, to my thinking," said Levin, who was beginning to get warm,
"that among eighty millions of people there can always be found not hundreds,
as now, but tens of thousands of people who have lost caste, ne’er-do-wells, who
are always ready to go anywhere—to Pogatchev’s bands, to Khiva, to Serbia…"
"I tell you that it’s not a case of hundreds or of ne’er-do-wells, but the best
representatives of the people!" said Sergey Ivanovitch, with as much irritation as
if he were defending the last penny of his fortune. "And what of the subscriptions?
In this case it is a whole people directly expressing their will."
"at word ‘people’ is so vague," said Levin. "Parish clerks, teachers, and one
in a thousand of the peasants, maybe, know what it’s all about. e rest of the
eighty millions, like Mihalitch, far from expressing their will, haven’t the faintest

dccxxii
idea what there is for them to express their will about. What right have we to say
that this is the people’s will?"

Chapter 
Sergey Ivanovitch, being practiced in argument, did not reply, but at once turned
the conversation to another aspect of the subject.
"Oh, if you want to learn the spirit of the people by arithmetical computation, of course it’s very diﬃcult to arrive at it. And voting has not been introduced
among us and cannot be introduced, for it does not express the will of the people; but there are other ways of reaching that. It is felt in the air, it is felt by the
heart. I won’t speak of those deep currents which are astir in the still ocean of the
people, and which are evident to every unprejudiced man; let us look at society
in the narrow sense. All the most diverse sections of the educated public, hostile
before, are merged in one. Every division is at an end, all the public organs say
the same thing over and over again, all feel the mighty torrent that has overtaken
them and is carrying them in one direction."
"Yes, all the newspapers do say the same thing," said the prince. "at’s true.
But so it is the same thing that all the frogs croak before a storm. One can hear
nothing for them."
"Frogs or no frogs, I’m not the editor of a paper and I don’t want to defend
them; but I am speaking of the unanimity in the intellectual world," said Sergey
Ivanovitch, addressing his brother. Levin would have answered, but the old prince
interrupted him.
"Well, about that unanimity, that’s another thing, one may say," said the
prince. "ere’s my son-in-law, Stepan Arkadyevitch, you know him. He’s got
a place now on the commiee of a commission and something or other, I don’t
remember. Only there’s nothing to do in it—why, Dolly, it’s no secret!—and a
salary of eight thousand. You try asking him whether his post is of use, he’ll
prove to you that it’s most necessary. And he’s a truthful man too, but there’s no
refusing to believe in the utility of eight thousand roubles."
"Yes, he asked me to give a message to Darya Alexandrovna about the post,"
said Sergey Ivanovitch reluctantly, feeling the prince’s remark to be ill-timed.
"So it is with the unanimity of the press. at’s been explained to me: as
soon as there’s war their incomes are doubled. How can they help believing in
the destinies of the people and the Slavonic races … and all that?"
"I don’t care for many of the papers, but that’s unjust," said Sergey
Ivanovitch.
"I would only make one condition," pursued the old prince. "Alphonse Karr

dccxxiii
said a capital thing before the war with Prussia: ‘You consider war to be inevitable? Very good. Let everyone who advocates war be enrolled in a special
regiment of advance-guards, for the front of every storm, of every aack, to lead
them all!’"
"A nice lot the editors would make!" said Katavasov, with a loud roar, as he
pictured the editors he knew in this picked legion.
"But they’d run," said Dolly, "they’d only be in the way."
"Oh, if they ran away, then we’d have grape-shot or Cossacks with whips
behind them," said the prince.
"But that’s a joke, and a poor one too, if you’ll excuse my saying so, prince,"
said Sergey Ivanovitch.
"I don’t see that it was a joke, that…" Levin was beginning, but Sergey
Ivanovitch interrupted him.
"Every member of society is called upon to do his own special work," said
he. "And men of thought are doing their work when they express public opinion.
And the single-hearted and full expression of public opinion is the service of the
press and a phenomenon to rejoice us at the same time. Twenty years ago we
should have been silent, but now we have heard the voice of the Russian people,
which is ready to rise as one man and ready to sacriﬁce itself for its oppressed
brethren; that is a great step and a proof of strength."
"But it’s not only making a sacriﬁce, but killing Turks," said Levin timidly.
"e people make sacriﬁces and are ready to make sacriﬁces for their soul, but not
for murder," he added, instinctively connecting the conversation with the ideas
that had been absorbing his mind.
"For their soul? at’s a most puzzling expression for a natural science man,
do you understand? What sort of thing is the soul?" said Katavasov, smiling.
"Oh, you know!"
"No, by God, I haven’t the faintest idea!" said Katavasov with a loud roar of
laughter.
"‘I bring not peace, but a sword,’ says Christ," Sergey Ivanovitch rejoined for
his part, quoting as simply as though it were the easiest thing to understand the
very passage that had always puzzled Levin most.
"at’s so, no doubt," the old man repeated again. He was standing near
them and responded to a chance glance turned in his direction.
"Ah, my dear fellow, you’re defeated, uerly defeated!" cried Katavasov
good-humoredly.
Levin reddened with vexation, not at being defeated, but at having failed to
control himself and being drawn into argument.
"No, I can’t argue with them," he thought; "they wear impenetrable armor,
while I’m naked."

dccxxiv
He saw that it was impossible to convince his brother and Katavasov, and
he saw even less possibility of himself agreeing with them. What they advocated
was the very pride of intellect that had almost been his ruin. He could not admit
that some dozens of men, among them his brother, had the right, on the ground
of what they were told by some hundreds of glib volunteers swarming to the
capital, to say that they and the newspapers were expressing the will and feeling
of the people, and a feeling which was expressed in vengeance and murder. He
could not admit this, because he neither saw the expression of such feelings in
the people among whom he was living, nor found them in himself (and he could
not but consider himself one of the persons making up the Russian people), and
most of all because he, like the people, did not know and could not know what
is for the general good, though he knew beyond a doubt that this general good
could be aained only by the strict observance of that law of right and wrong
which has been revealed to every man, and therefore he could not wish for war
or advocate war for any general objects whatever. He said as Mihalitch did and
the people, who had expressed their feeling in the traditional invitations of the
Varyagi: "Be princes and rule over us. Gladly we promise complete submission.
All the labor, all humiliations, all sacriﬁces we take upon ourselves; but we will
not judge and decide." And now, according to Sergey Ivanovitch’s account, the
people had foregone this privilege they had bought at such a costly price.
He wanted to say too that if public opinion were an infallible guide, then
why were not revolutions and the commune as lawful as the movement in favor of
the Slavonic peoples? But these were merely thoughts that could sele nothing.
One thing could be seen beyond doubt—that was that at the actual moment the
discussion was irritating Sergey Ivanovitch, and so it was wrong to continue it.
And Levin ceased speaking and then called the aention of his guests to the fact
that the storm clouds were gathering, and that they had beer be going home
before it rained.

Chapter 
e old prince and Sergey Ivanovitch got into the trap and drove oﬀ; the rest of
the party hastened homewards on foot.
But the storm-clouds, turning white and then black, moved down so quickly
that they had to quicken their pace to get home before the rain. e foremost
clouds, lowering and black as soot-laden smoke, rushed with extraordinary swiness over the sky. ey were still two hundred paces from home and a gust of
wind had already blown up, and every second the downpour might be looked for.
e children ran ahead with frightened and gleeful shrieks. Darya Alexan-

dccxxv
drovna, struggling painfully with her skirts that clung round her legs, was not
walking, but running, her eyes ﬁxed on the children. e men of the party, holding their hats on, strode with long steps beside her. ey were just at the steps
when a big drop fell splashing on the edge of the iron guering. e children and
their elders aer them ran into the shelter of the house, talking merrily.
"Katerina Alexandrovna?" Levin asked of Agafea Mihalovna, who met them
with kerchiefs and rugs in the hall.
"We thought she was with you," she said.
"And Mitya?"
"In the copse, he must be, and the nurse with him."
Levin snatched up the rugs and ran towards the copse.
In that brief interval of time the storm clouds had moved on, covering the
sun so completely that it was dark as an eclipse. Stubbornly, as though insisting on
its rights, the wind stopped Levin, and tearing the leaves and ﬂowers oﬀ the lime
trees and stripping the white birch branches into strange unseemly nakedness, it
twisted everything on one side—acacias, ﬂowers, burdocks, long grass, and tall
tree-tops. e peasant girls working in the garden ran shrieking into shelter in
the servants’ quarters. e streaming rain had already ﬂung its white veil over
all the distant forest and half the ﬁelds close by, and was rapidly swooping down
upon the copse. e wet of the rain spurting up in tiny drops could be smelt in
the air.
Holding his head bent down before him, and struggling with the wind that
strove to tear the wraps away from him, Levin was moving up to the copse and
had just caught sight of something white behind the oak tree, when there was
a sudden ﬂash, the whole earth seemed on ﬁre, and the vault of heaven seemed
crashing overhead. Opening his blinded eyes, Levin gazed through the thick veil
of rain that separated him now from the copse, and to his horror the ﬁrst thing
he saw was the green crest of the familiar oak-tree in the middle of the copse
uncannily changing its position. "Can it have been struck?" Levin hardly had
time to think when, moving more and more rapidly, the oak tree vanished behind
the other trees, and he heard the crash of the great tree falling upon the others.
e ﬂash of lightning, the crash of thunder, and the instantaneous chill that
ran through him were all merged for Levin in one sense of terror.
"My God! my God! not on them!" he said.
And though he thought at once how senseless was his prayer that they
should not have been killed by the oak which had fallen now, he repeated it,
knowing that he could do nothing beer than uer this senseless prayer.
Running up to the place where they usually went, he did not ﬁnd them
there.
ey were at the other end of the copse under an old lime-tree; they were

dccxxvi
calling him. Two ﬁgures in dark dresses (they had been light summer dresses
when they started out) were standing bending over something. It was Kiy with
the nurse. e rain was already ceasing, and it was beginning to get light when
Levin reached them. e nurse was not wet on the lower part of her dress, but
Kiy was drenched through, and her soaked clothes clung to her. ough the rain
was over, they still stood in the same position in which they had been standing
when the storm broke. Both stood bending over a perambulator with a green
umbrella.
"Alive? Unhurt? ank God!" he said, splashing with his soaked boots
through the standing water and running up to them.
Kiy’s rosy wet face was turned towards him, and she smiled timidly under
her shapeless sopped hat.
"Aren’t you ashamed of yoursel? I can’t think how you can be so reckless!"
he said angrily to his wife.
"It wasn’t my fault, really. We were just meaning to go, when he made such
a to-do that we had to change him. We were just…" Kiy began defending herself.
Mitya was unharmed, dry, and still fast asleep.
"Well, thank God! I don’t know what I’m saying!"
ey gathered up the baby’s wet belongings; the nurse picked up the baby
and carried it. Levin walked beside his wife, and, penitent for having been angry,
he squeezed her hand when the nurse was not looking.

Chapter 
During the whole of that day, in the extremely diﬀerent conversations in which
he took part, only as it were with the top layer of his mind, in spite of the disappointment of not ﬁnding the change he expected in himself, Levin had been all
the while joyfully conscious of the fulness of his heart.
Aer the rain it was too wet to go for a walk; besides, the storm clouds still
hung about the horizon, and gathered here and there, black and thundery, on the
rim of the sky. e whole party spent the rest of the day in the house.
No more discussions sprang up; on the contrary, aer dinner every one was
in the most amiable frame of mind.
At ﬁrst Katavasov amused the ladies by his original jokes, which always
pleased people on their ﬁrst acquaintance with him. en Sergey Ivanovitch induced him to tell them about the very interesting observations he had made on the
habits and characteristics of common houseﬂies, and their life. Sergey Ivanovitch,
too, was in good spirits, and at tea his brother drew him on to explain his views
of the future of the Eastern question, and he spoke so simply and so well, that

dccxxvii
everyone listened eagerly.
Kiy was the only one who did not hear it all—she was summoned to give
Mitya his bath.
A few minutes aer Kiy had le the room she sent for Levin to come to
the nursery.
Leaving his tea, and regretfully interrupting the interesting conversation,
and at the same time uneasily wondering why he had been sent for, as this only
happened on important occasions, Levin went to the nursery.
Although he had been much interested by Sergey Ivanovitch’s views of the
new epoch in history that would be created by the emancipation of forty millions
of men of Slavonic race acting with Russia, a conception quite new to him, and
although he was disturbed by uneasy wonder at being sent for by Kiy, as soon
as he came out of the drawing room and was alone, his mind reverted at once to
the thoughts of the morning. And all the theories of the signiﬁcance of the Slav
element in the history of the world seemed to him so trivial compared with what
was passing in his own soul, that he instantly forgot it all and dropped back into
the same frame of mind that he had been in that morning.
He did not, as he had done at other times, recall the whole train of
thought—that he did not need. He fell back at once into the feeling which had
guided him, which was connected with those thoughts, and he found that feeling
in his soul even stronger and more deﬁnite than before. He did not, as he had
had to do with previous aempts to ﬁnd comforting arguments, need to revive a
whole chain of thought to ﬁnd the feeling. Now, on the contrary, the feeling of
joy and peace was keener than ever, and thought could not keep pace with feeling.
He walked across the terrace and looked at two stars that had come out
in the darkening sky, and suddenly he remembered. "Yes, looking at the sky, I
thought that the dome that I see is not a deception, and then I thought something,
I shirked facing something," he mused. "But whatever it was, there can be no
disproving it! I have but to think, and all will come clear!"
Just as he was going into the nursery he remembered what it was he had
shirked facing. It was that if the chief proof of the Divinity was His revelation of
what is right, how is it this revelation is conﬁned to the Christian church alone?
What relation to this revelation have the beliefs of the Buddhists, Mohammedans,
who preached and did good too?
It seemed to him that he had an answer to this question; but he had not time
to formulate it to himself before he went into the nursery.
Kiy was standing with her sleeves tucked up over the baby in the bath.
Hearing her husband’s footstep, she turned towards him, summoning him to her
with her smile. With one hand she was supporting the fat baby that lay ﬂoating
and sprawling on its back, while with the other she squeezed the sponge over him.

dccxxviii
"Come, look, look!" she said, when her husband came up to her. "Agafea
Mihalovna’s right. He knows us!"
Mitya had on that day given unmistakable, incontestable signs of recognizing all his friends.
As soon as Levin approached the bath, the experiment was tried, and it was
completely successful. e cook, sent for with this object, bent over the baby. He
frowned and shook his head disapprovingly. Kiy bent down to him, he gave her
a beaming smile, propped his lile hands on the sponge and chirruped, making
such a queer lile contented sound with his lips, that Kiy and the nurse were
not alone in their admiration. Levin, too, was surprised and delighted.
e baby was taken out of the bath, drenched with water, wrapped in towels,
dried, and aer a piercing scream, handed to his mother.
"Well, I am glad you are beginning to love him," said Kiy to her husband,
when she had seled herself comfortably in her usual place, with the baby at her
breast. "I am so glad! It had begun to distress me. You said you had no feeling for
him."
"No; did I say that? I only said I was disappointed."
"What! disappointed in him?"
"Not disappointed in him, but in my own feeling; I had expected more. I
had expected a rush of new delightful emotion to come as a surprise. And then
instead of that—disgust, pity…"
She listened aentively, looking at him over the baby, while she put back
on her slender ﬁngers the rings she had taken oﬀ while giving Mitya his bath.
"And most of all, at there being far more apprehension and pity than pleasure. Today, aer that fright during the storm, I understand how I love him."
Kiy’s smile was radiant.
"Were you very much frightened?" she said. "So was I too, but I feel it more
now that it’s over. I’m going to look at the oak. How nice Katavasov is! And what
a happy day we’ve had altogether. And you’re so nice with Sergey Ivanovitch,
when you care to be…. Well, go back to them. It’s always so hot and steamy here
aer the bath."

Chapter 
Going out of the nursery and being again alone, Levin went back at once to the
thought, in which there was something not clear.
Instead of going into the drawing room, where he heard voices, he stopped
on the terrace, and leaning his elbows on the parapet, he gazed up at the sky.
It was quite dark now, and in the south, where he was looking, there were

dccxxix
no clouds. e storm had dried on to the opposite side of the sky, and there
were ﬂashes of lightning and distant thunder from that quarter. Levin listened to
the monotonous drip from the lime trees in the garden, and looked at the triangle
of stars he knew so well, and the Milky Way with its branches that ran through
its midst. At each ﬂash of lightning the Milky Way, and even the bright stars,
vanished, but as soon as the lightning died away, they reappeared in their places
as though some hand had ﬂung them back with careful aim.
"Well, what is it perplexes me?" Levin said to himself, feeling beforehand
that the solution of his diﬃculties was ready in his soul, though he did not know
it yet. "Yes, the one unmistakable, incontestable manifestation of the Divinity is
the law of right and wrong, which has come into the world by revelation, and
which I feel in myself, and in the recognition of which—I don’t make myself, but
whether I will or not—I am made one with other men in one body of believers,
which is called the church. Well, but the Jews, the Mohammedans, the Confucians, the Buddhists—what of them?" he put to himself the question he had feared
to face. "Can these hundreds of millions of men be deprived of that highest blessing without which life has no meaning?" He pondered a moment, but immediately
corrected himself. "But what am I questioning?" he said to himself. "I am questioning the relation to Divinity of all the diﬀerent religions of all mankind. I am
questioning the universal manifestation of God to all the world with all those
misty blurs. What am I about? To me individually, to my heart has been revealed
a knowledge beyond all doubt, and unaainable by reason, and here I am obstinately trying to express that knowledge in reason and words.
"Don’t I know that the stars don’t move?" he asked himself, gazing at the
bright planet which had shied its position up to the topmost twig of the birchtree. "But looking at the movements of the stars, I can’t picture to myself the
rotation of the earth, and I’m right in saying that the stars move.
"And could the astronomers have understood and calculated anything, if
they had taken into account all the complicated and varied motions of the earth?
All the marvelous conclusions they have reached about the distances, weights,
movements, and deﬂections of the heavenly bodies are only founded on the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies about a stationary earth, on that very motion I see before me now, which has been so for millions of men during long ages,
and was and will be always alike, and can always be trusted. And just as the conclusions of the astronomers would have been vain and uncertain if not founded
on observations of the seen heavens, in relation to a single meridian and a single
horizon, so would my conclusions be vain and uncertain if not founded on that
conception of right, which has been and will be always alike for all men, which
has been revealed to me as a Christian, and which can always be trusted in my
soul. e question of other religions and their relations to Divinity I have no right

dccxxx
to decide, and no possibility of deciding."
"Oh, you haven’t gone in then?" he heard Kiy’s voice all at once, as she
came by the same way to the drawing-room.
"What is it? you’re not worried about anything?" she said, looking intently
at his face in the starlight.
But she could not have seen his face if a ﬂash of lightning had not hidden
the stars and revealed it. In that ﬂash she saw his face distinctly, and seeing him
calm and happy, she smiled at him.
"She understands," he thought; "she knows what I’m thinking about. Shall
I tell her or not? Yes, I’ll tell her." But at the moment he was about to speak, she
began speaking.
"Kostya! do something for me," she said; "go into the corner room and see
if they’ve made it all right for Sergey Ivanovitch. I can’t very well. See if they’ve
put the new wash stand in it."
"Very well, I’ll go directly," said Levin, standing up and kissing her.
"No, I’d beer not speak of it," he thought, when she had gone in before
him. "It is a secret for me alone, of vital importance for me, and not to be put into
words.
"is new feeling has not changed me, has not made me happy and enlightened all of a sudden, as I had dreamed, just like the feeling for my child. ere
was no surprise in this either. Faith—or not faith—I don’t know what it is—but
this feeling has come just as imperceptibly through suﬀering, and has taken ﬁrm
root in my soul.
"I shall go on in the same way, losing my temper with Ivan the coachman,
falling into angry discussions, expressing my opinions tactlessly; there will be still
the same wall between the holy of holies of my soul and other people, even my
wife; I shall still go on scolding her for my own terror, and being remorseful for
it; I shall still be as unable to understand with my reason why I pray, and I shall
still go on praying; but my life now, my whole life apart from anything that can
happen to me, every minute of it is no more meaningless, as it was before, but it
has the positive meaning of goodness, which I have the power to put into it."

dccxxxi
*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNA KARENINA ***

A Word from Project Gutenberg
We will update this book if we ﬁnd any errors.
is book can be found under: hp://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law
means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General
Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive speciﬁc permission. If you do not charge
anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. ey may be modiﬁed and printed and given
away – you may do practically anything in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.

e Full Project Gutenberg License
Please read this before you distribute or use this work.
To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work
associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply
with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this ﬁle
or online at hp://www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section . General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

dccxxxiv
.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you
indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this
license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not
agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return
or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth
in paragraph .E..
.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used
on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. ere are a few things that you can do with
most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full
terms of this agreement. See paragraph .C below. ere are a lot of things you
can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic
works. See paragraph .E below.
.C. e Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying
or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its aached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without
charge with others.
.D. e copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what
you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work
or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. e Foundation makes no representations
concerning the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.
.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

dccxxxv
.E.. e following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated)
is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

is eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook
or online at hp://www.gutenberg.org . If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.
.E.. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts
not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you
are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the
requirements of paragraphs .E. through .E. or obtain permission for the use of
the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs .E.
or .E..
.E.. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with
the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs .E. through .E. and any additional terms imposed by
the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™
License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at
the beginning of this work.
.E.. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any ﬁles containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
.E.. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the
sentence set forth in paragraph .E. with active links or immediate access to the
full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.
.E.. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies
of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or

dccxxxvi
other format used in the oﬃcial version posted on the oﬃcial Project Gutenberg™
web site (hp://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of
obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII”
or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™
License as speciﬁed in paragraph .E..
.E.. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with
paragraph .E. or .E..
.E.. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to
or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that
- You pay a royalty fee of % of the gross proﬁts you derive from the use of
Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to
calculate your applicable taxes. e fee is owed to the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this
paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty
payments must be paid within  days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address speciﬁed in Section
, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation.”
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notiﬁes you in
writing (or by e-mail) within  days of receipt that s/he does not agree to
the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such
a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical
medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project
Gutenberg™ works.
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph .F., a full refund of any money
paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is
discovered and reported to you within  days of receipt of the work.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of
Project Gutenberg™ works.
.E.. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on diﬀerent terms than are set forth in this agreement,
you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project Gutenberg Literary

dccxxxvii
Archive Foundation and e Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section .
below.
.F.
.F.. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
eﬀort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not
protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these eﬀorts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on
which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium,
a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
.F.. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES – Except for the
“Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph .F., the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses,
including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH .F.. YOU AGREE THAT
THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR
UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.F.. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND – If you discover
a defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can receive a
refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a wrien explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical
medium, you must return the medium with your wrien explanation. e person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a
replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the
person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity
to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also
defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to
ﬁx the problem.
.F.. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph .F., this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PUR-

dccxxxviii
POSE.
.F.. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this
agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer
or limitation permied by the applicable state law. e invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
.F.. INDEMNITY – You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing
copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project
Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modiﬁcation, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section . Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™
Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works
in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old,
middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the eﬀorts of hundreds of
volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and ﬁnancial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s goals and ensuring that
the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to
come. In , the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to
provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your eﬀorts and donations can help, see Sections  and  and the Foundation web page at hp://www.pglaf.org .

Section . Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Arive Foundation
e Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non proﬁt (c)() educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and
granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. e Foundation's EIN
or federal tax identiﬁcation number is -. Its (c)() leer is posted
at hp://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the Project

dccxxxix
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permied by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
e Foundation's principal oﬃce is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the mailing
address: PO Box , Fairbanks, AK , but its volunteers and employees are scaered throughout numerous locations. Its business oﬃce is located
at  North  West, Salt Lake City, UT , () -, email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be
found at the Foundation's web site and oﬃcial page at hp://www.pglaf.org
For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section . Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Arive Foundation
Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread public
support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public
domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine readable
form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment.
Many small donations ($ to $,) are particularly important to maintaining tax
exempt status with the IRS.
e Foundation is commied to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all  states of the United States. Compliance
requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable eﬀort, much paperwork
and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit
donations in locations where we have not received wrien conﬁrmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit hp://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with oﬀers
to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staﬀ.
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways includ-

dccxl
ing checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit:
hp://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

Section . General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of
a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For thirty
years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose
network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are oen created from several printed editions,
all of which are conﬁrmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. us, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.
Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, oen in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.
Corrected editions of our eBooks replace the old ﬁle and take over the old
ﬁlename and etext number. e replaced older ﬁle is renamed. Versions based
on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving new ﬁlenames and etext
numbers.
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
hp://www.gutenberg.org
is Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how to
make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to
help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsleer to
hear about new eBooks.

